[PDF PAGE 1]
Liquid-Propellant Rocket Engine Throttling:                         
A Comprehensive Review
Matthew J. Casiano1
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812
James R. Hulka2
Jacobs Engineering, ESTS Group, Huntsville, AL, 35812
and
Vigor Yang3
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332
Liquid-Propellant Rocket Engines (LREs) are capable of on-command variable thrust or 
thrust modulation, an operability advantage that has been studied intermittently since the 
late 1930s.  Throttleable LREs can be used for planetary entry and descent, space 
rendezvous, orbital maneuvering including orientation and stabilization in space, and 
hovering and hazard avoidance during planetary landing.  Other applications have included 
control of aircraft rocket e ngines, limiting of vehicle acceleration or velocity using 
retrograde rockets, and ballistic missile defense trajectory control.  Throttleable LREs can 
also continuously follow the most economical thrust curve in a given situation, compared to 
discrete throttling changes over a few select operating points.  The effects of variable thrust 
on the mechanics and dynamics of an LRE as well as difficulties and issues surrounding the 
throttling process are important aspects of throttling behavior.  This review provides a 
detailed survey of LRE throttling centered around engines from the United States.  Several 
LRE throttling methods are discussed, including high -pressure-drop systems, dual-injector 
manifolds, gas injection, multiple chambers, pulse modulation, thro at throttling, movable 
injector components, and hydrodynamically dissipative injectors.  Concerns and issues 
surrounding each method are examined, and the advantages and shortcomings compared.
Nomenclature
LRE = Liquid-Propellant Rocket Engine
I. Introduction
IQUID-Propellant Rocket Engines (LREs) with thrust that can be varied by command have been evaluated since 
the late 1930s.  The Vision for Space Exploration, 1 outlined in the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration Authorization Act of 2005, 2 brought a renewed interest to such throttle capable LREs.  The Act 
established a program to develop sustained human presence on the Moon as a stepping-stone to future exploration of 
Mars and other remote destinations. 2  Throttleable LREs will undoubtedly play a significant role in these missions, 
so understanding the dynamics of throttling LREs as well as the issues of the throttling process will be of critical 
importance for the success of these missions.  This review provides a detailed survey of LRE throttling centered 
around engines from the United States.
The term ‘throttling’ is commonly used to describe a varying thrust profile or thrust modulation in an LRE.  This 
nomenclature is used primarily because one of the most common methods of thrust control in an LRE is from 
regulation of propellant flow rates by control valves.  While throttling an LRE is a critical requirement during a 
                                                       
1 Aerospace Engineer, Propulsion Systems Department, Mailstop ER42, Senior Member.
2 Engineering Specialist, Propulsion Systems Department, Mailstop ER32, Senior Member.
3 Department Chair, School of Aerospace Engineering, 313 Montgomory Knight Building, Fellow.
L

[PDF PAGE 2]
lunar descent, there are many other applications for throttleable LREs.  A throttleable LRE that continuously follows 
the most economical thrust curve provides optimum vehicle performance compared to discrete throttling changes 
over a few percent of the rated power level.  The continually changing thrust reduces the amount of propellants 
required for a mission, thus reducing the mass of the vehicle.  Throttleable LREs can also be used for planetary entry 
and descent, space rendezvous, orbital maneuvering including orientation and stabilization in space, and hovering 
and hazard avoidance during planetary landing. 3-5  Other applications include control of aircraft rocket engines, 
limiting of vehicle acceleration or velocity using retrograde rockets, and ballistic missile defense trajectory control.5, 
6  An early attempt at estimating throttling requirements for several such missions reported examples such as 10-to-1 
throttling for lunar descent, 1.3-to-1 for Venus launch, and up to 100-to-1 for ballistic missiles and orbital 
rendezvous with generally higher throttling ratios for more precise trajectory control. 7, 8  LREs can be customized 
for particular flight applications, including a wide range of thrust values, quick restarts, fast pulsing, and quick 
attitude changes and minor velocity changes.  References [3] and [9] describe other benefits of LREs, in general, 
including that the thrust can be varied on command, which allows further tailoring of the flight application.  While 
thrust profiles of rocket engines with solid propellants have become more flexible, LREs are still much simpler to 
develop randomly-commanded controllable thrust profiles, since the combustion process is easier to control, stop, 
and restart.  
Throttleable LREs were originally developed during rocket aircraft experiments and research in Germany in the 
late 1930s headed by Major-General Dr. Walter Dornberger (then Major) and Hellmuth Walter.  The first aircraft to 
incorporate LREs for propulsion during a portion of the flight was the German Heinkel He 112 fighter aircraft in 
early 1937 at Neuhardenberg airfield, 10, 11 powered by a version of an A2 (Aggregate 2) rocket motor.  This rocket 
motor, designed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, was fitted to the He 112 aircraft and fueled from nitrogen-pressurized 
alcohol and liquid oxygen tanks. 11  As an aside, there are reports and testimonies that describe conflicting dates, 
places, and events during the mid-to-late 1930s.12-18  However, the matters of which aircraft, which engine, and what 
date for the first rocket powered aircraft flight are corroborated by testimony from Heinkel, Dornberger, and von 
Braun to have occurred as previously described.11  In November of 1937, another Heinkel He 112 aircraft was flown 
at Neuhardenberg.  During a portion of its flight it used a TP-1 (Turbopump-1) rocket engine, designed and built by 
Hellmuth Walter.  An 80%-concentration solution of H2O2 (20% concentration H2O) was forced into the combustion 
chamber and mixed with a spray catalyst (water solution of sodium or calcium permanganate).  A manual pilot-
operated stop -cock pneumatically regulated the flow of the H 2O2 solution to the combustion chamber. 11  The 
maximum thrust was 220 lbs with an unknown amount of throttling, but this was the first known rocket engine to 
incorporate manual thrust throttling. 17, 19  Prior to 1937, LREs were predominantly used by the early pioneers for 
experimental and meteorological research rockets; these LREs operated at essentially constant thrust. 3   In April of 
1938, the Heinkel He 112 became the first aircraft to be powered by rocket thrust alone through its entire takeoff and 
flight at Peenemünde West airfield using the throttleable Walter -designed TP -1 engine. 11, 19   The resear ch on 
throttling engines, after these pioneering works, focused on applicability to missile defense, weapons systems, and 
then space vehicles.7, 8, 20
There are several methods identified that can control thrust of an LRE.  Dressler describes nine methods that 
have been used in past configurations.19 Many of these methods were described conceptually as early as 195021 and 
several others in 1963. 7  Several had been demonstrated by this time, and are all discussed in this review. Several 
methods are also discussed in Russian texts with attention to the details of injector element design.  The nine 
methods mentioned in [19] will be discussed in more detail in this paper.
There are only a few physical parameters that can be varied to change the thrust of a single engine, including the 
propellant types or compositions, the propellant flow rates, the nozzle exit area, and the nozzle throat area.  The 
propellants and nozzle exit area are difficult to control or vary due to physical restrictions, while the nozzle throat 
area is difficult to vary if the heat fluxes are high.  Consequently, varying the propellant flow rates is found to be the 
simplest recourse to varying thrust.  The simple relationship between thrust an d propellant flow rates comes from 
the rocket thrust equation, 
( )T e e a eF m v p p A     (1)
This paper discusses several LRE throttling methods, including high -pressure-drop systems using propellant 
flow regulation, dual -manifold inject ors, gas injection, multiple chambers, pulse modulation, throat throttling, 
movable injector components, and hydrodynamically dissipative injectors.  Several significant projects and studies 
are discussed.  Critical issues such as combustion instability,22 performance degradation, and excessive heat transfer 

[PDF PAGE 3]
are examined for each method.  Any further concerns and issues surrounding each method are examined, and the 
advantages and shortcomings of the different methods are compared.
II. Discussion
A top level summary of pertinent i nformation from the reviewed projects, research tasks, and investigations are 
combined in Table I.  The following sections review each of the throttling methods.
A. High-Pressure-Drop Injectors
A typical LRE with a single, fixed-geometry injector can generally be throttled approximately 2-to-1 or 3-to-1.6, 
19  To accommodate deep throttling requirements – often 5-to-1 or more – with a fixed-geometry injector, higher-
than-usual injector pressure drops or head losses are necessary to maintain a minimum injector pressure drop at 
minimum thrust.  A satisfactory minimum injector pressure drop is required to ensure adequate resistance for system 
stability and to ensure sufficient mixing and atomization for good performance.  In general, experience and analysis 
have shown that a nominal injector stiffness (pinj/pc) should be around 15% to 20% to avoid combustion instability, 
but can range from 5% to 25% depending on injector type and thermodynamic conditions.19, 23
The primary advantage of a fixed -geometry injector is simplicity.  Flow of propellants can be regulated by 
control valves in the propellant lines.  Propellants can also be regulated using variable area c avitating venturis.24, 25  
However, since injector stiffness varies linearly with flow rate for liquid propellants, a 5% minimum pinj/pc at 10% 
thrust would require 50% pinj/pc at 100% thrust.  Thus the primary disadvantage of a high-pressure-drop injector is 
a high supply pressure requirement imposed on the pressurization system, tankage, and turbomachinery. 19
1. Project Thumper (1948) 26
Project Thumper, a program in the United States to develop high -altitude antiaircraft ballistic missile defense 
against the German V -2 rockets, investigated early rocket engine throttling, including instabilities during throttling 
operation, throttling engine performance, and the limits of rocket engine throttling .27  A low-pressure-drop injector 
and several iterations of high-pressure-drop showerhead injectors were evaluated.  Initial tests with the low-
pressure-drop injector developed externally observed oscillations between 10 Hz and 20 Hz, called motorboating, at 
low thrust conditions.  These oscillations were eliminated with a high-pressure-drop injector, and this injector was 
speculated to have eliminated liquid oxygen boiling in the manifold, damping pressure perturbations in the chamber 
by increasing the resistance of the injector, and/or decreasing combustion transients at the injector face.  
Additionally, erratic irregular fluctuations, called chugging, were encountered during testing below 65 psia chamber 
pressure.  The chugging was described to be like an engine operating intermittently, such as an explosion-cycle 
thrust chamber, and was attributed to pressure oscillations causing intermittent oxygen vaporization in the injection 
orifice.  A transition between smooth combustion, motorboating, and then chugging was observed as chamber 
pressure continued to decrease.  A high frequency instability between 1100 Hz and 1500 Hz, called whistling, was 
present in most of the tests with the high-pressure-drop injector. 
The performance over the throttling range generally agreed with theoretical model trends.  The characteristic 
velocity efficiency is shown in Fig. 1.  However a significant reduction in performance occurred at less than roughly 
30% chamber pressure.  Higher than expected propellant flow was observed to be necessary at low thrust and was 
explained to be due to poorer combustion at the lower chamber pressures.  The various configurations plotted in Fig. 
1 examined the effect on nozzle area expansion, chamber length, throat diameter, and injector modifications.
Heat transfer rates remained constant over most of the throttling range down to r oughly 59% chamber pressure.  
Below this, the heat transfer rate dropped off and was assumed to be due to separating flow in the nozzle.  At 56% 
chamber pressure using the low -pressure-drop injector and at 87% chamber pressure using the high -pressure-drop 
injector, the heat transfer rates increased 2.5x to 3x over normal, which was correlated to a 300 Hz oscillation in the 
external environment, but it was not understood whether this was a cause or a symptom of the high heat transfer.  
Below roughly 30% chamber pressure, fuel coolant was projected to vaporize in the regeneratively cooled engines.  
To prevent vaporization of the coolant, the engine was required to operate with a low mixture ratio.  This helped 
prevent roughness, burnout, or cessation of operation due to fuel vaporization in the coolant jacket.

[PDF PAGE 4]
Table I. Summary of Information from Reviewed Projects, Research Tasks, and Investigations
Throttling 
Methodology Program Program 
Period Organizations
Engine/ 
Rocket 
Designations
Operating Parameters Throttling
Propellant 
Combinations/ 
Injector Type
Throttling Related
Research Focus
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
Project 
Thumper
1948 –
1949
 General Electric
 US Army  Malta Engine  1000 lbs rated thrust, 
315 psia rated pc
 10% to 104%
 Ethanol (with 
silicone) / LO2
 Malta Low-Pressure-
Drop Injector
 High-Pressure-Drop 
Showerhead
 Pursue development of 
high-altitude antiaircraft 
defense
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
Project MX-
794 1950
 Willow Run Research 
Institute, University 
of Michigan
 USAF
 Engine 0073
 Engine 0150
 Engine 0151
 1000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc, 2.75 
MR
 200 lbs rated thrust, 300 
psia rated pc, 2.75 MR
 10% to 167%
 33% to 210%
 2.25 < MR < 5.0
 80% RFNA and 20% 
aniline / furfuryl 
alcohol
 JP-3 (AN-F-58a) 
(with aniline leader) / 
RFNA
 Doublet and OFO
triplet
 Obtain performance for 
defense systems
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector NASA Study 1964
 NASA Lewis 
Research Center
 Pratt & Whitney 
Aircraft
 Modified 
RL10A-1
 15000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc, 5.0 
MR
 3.3% to 100%
 2.0 < MR < 6.0
 LH2 / LO2
 Swirl coax  - 20% ox 
pressure drop
 Shear coax - 33% ox 
pressure drop
 Swirl coax - 60% ox 
pressure drop
 Obtain steady-state and 
dynamic characteristics 
during throttling
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
ARES 
Throttling-
Scaling Design 
Study 
Program*
1967 –
1969
 Aerojet-General Corp.
 Air Force Rocket 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center
 ARES 
Engine 
Design*
 25000 lbs, 100000 lbs, 
or 500000 lbs rated 
thrust, 2800 psia rated 
pc*
 10-to-1*
 33-to-1*
 A-50 / N2O4*
 HIPERTHIN platelet*  Design a throttleable and 
restartable engine
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
DC-X and DC-
XA
1991 –
1995
 Pratt & Whitney
 McDonnell Douglas
 NASA
 RL10A-5
 13500 lbs rated thrust, 
485 psia rated pc, 6.0 
MR
 3.3-to-1
 5.0 < MR < 6.0
 LH2 / LO2
 Swirl coax
 Single-stage to orbit rocket 
technology demonstrator
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
Joint 
Cooperative 
Study
1996
 NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center
 Aerojet
 Chemical Automatics 
Design Bureau 
(CADB)
 RD-0120
 441000 lbs rated thrust, 
3170 psia rated pc, 6.0 
MR
 25% to 100%
 3.7 < MR < 6.4
 LH2 / LO2
 Shear coax
 Potential use for the X-33 
demonstrator vehicle 
propulsion system
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
Joint 
Cooperative 
Study
1997
 Boeing Rocketdyne
 NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center
 SSME
 470000 lbs rated thrust, 
3006 psia rated pc, 6.0 
MR
 17% to 109%
 5.0 < MR < 6.0
 LH2 / LO2
 Swirl coax
 Potential use for the X-33 
demonstrator vehicle 
propulsion system
High-Pressure-
Drop Injector
Common 
Extensible 
Cryogenic 
Engine
2005 –
current
 Pratt & Whitney 
Rocketdyne
 NASA
 Modified 
RL10
 13700 lbs rated thrust, 
381 psia rated pc, 5.6 
MR
 9.5% to 100%
 2.9 < MR < 6.0
 LH2 / LO2
 Swirl coax
 Technology development, 
demonstration, risk 
reduction, and maturation 
of a deep throttling, highly 

[PDF PAGE 5]
reliable, reusable cryogenic 
engine
Dual-Manifold 
Injector
Advanced 
Throttling 
Concepts
Studies
1963 –
1966
 Pratt & Whitney 
Aircraft
 United Technology 
Center
 US Air Force
 Research 
Engine
 15000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc, 1.7 
MR
 1000 lbs rated thrust
 8500 lbs rated thrust
 0.8% to 108%
 12.8-to-1
 29.4-to-1
 A-50 / N2O4
 H2 / F2
 BA1014 / F2*
 Triplet element
 Quadruplet element
 Evaluate injector systems 
that provide high 
combustion performance 
during deep throttling
Dual-Manifold 
Injector
Chamber 
Technology for 
Space Storable 
Propellants
1964 –
1969
 Rocketdyne
 NASA
 Research 
Engine
 1000 lbs rated thrust, 
100 psia rated pc, 2.0 
MR
 15% to 150%
 MMH, butene-1, and 
diborane / FLOX
 Oxygen difluoride
 Impinging
 Develop design criteria for 
selected space storable fuels
Dual-Manifold 
Injector
Reusable 
Rocket Engine 
Program
1967 –
1972
 Pratt & Whitney 
Aircraft
 Air Force Rocket 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 Advanced 
Cryogenic 
Engine
 XLR-129-P-1
 250000 lbs rated thrust
 2740 psia main chamber 
rated pc
 4793 psia preburner 
rated pc
 5-to-1
 5 < MR < 7 
main injector
 0.72 < MR < 
1.26 preburner
 LH2 / LO2
 Stacked tangential 
inlet
 Demonstrate performance 
and mechanical integrity of 
rocket engine
Dual-Manifold 
Injector
Throttleable 
Primary 
Injector for 
Staged 
Combustion 
Engine 
Program
1968 –
1970
 Aerojet-General Corp.
 Air Force Rocket 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 MIST 
derived  50000 lbs rated thrust  10%
 A-50 / N2O4
 HIPERTHIN platelet, 
impinging oxidizer/ 
impinging fuel
 Develop design criteria for 
selected space storable fuels
Dual-Manifold 
Injector
Advanced 
Expander Test 
Bed Program
1990 –
1993
1996 –
1997
 Pratt & Whitney
 NASA
 Expander 
cycle engine
 20000 lbs rated thrust
 25000 lbs rated thrust  Proprietary  H2 / LO2
 swirl coax
 Develop and demonstrate an 
expander cycle oxygen-
hydrogen engine 
technology applicable for 
space engines
Gas Injection NACA 
Research
1956 –
1957
 NACA Lewis Flight 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 Research 
Engine
 1000 lbs rated thrust
 Helium gas
 34%-89%
 1.3 < MR < 2.4
 NH3 (with lithium) / 
WFNA
 Doublet
 Investigation into gas 
injection throttling
Gas Injection
Feasibility 
Study and 
Experimental 
Program
1963  United Technology
Center
 Research 
Engine
 500 lbs rated thrust, 300 
psia pc
 500 lbs rated thrust, 150 
psia pc
 Helium gas
 6% to 223%
 MMH / MON-15
 A-50 / N2O4
 Triplet FOF, duo-
doublet FOOF, 
showerhead, 25% 
showerhead / 75% 
duo-doublet
 Investigation into gas 
injection throttling using 
various injection concepts
Gas Injection LMDE Concept 1963 –
1965  Rocketdyne  SE-10  10500 lbs rated thrust
 Helium gas  10-to-1  A-50 / N2O4
 Competing Apollo lunar 
descent engine
Gas Injection NASA Study 1964
 NASA Lewis 
Research Center
 Pratt & Whitney 
Aircraft
 RL10A-1
 15000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc, 5.0 
MR
 Helium gas, oxygen gas
 10-to-1
 LH2 / LO2
 Swirl coax  - 20% ox 
pressure drop
 Shear coax - 33% ox 
pressure drop
 Swirl coax - 60% ox 
pressure drop
 Obtain steady-state and 
dynamic characteristics
Gas Injection Advanced 1964  Pratt & Whitney  Research  15000 lbs rated thrust,  2% to 100%  A-50 / N2O4  Evaluate injector systems 

[PDF PAGE 6]
Throttling 
Concepts Study
Aircraft
 Air Force
Engine 300 psia rated pc, 1.7 
MR
 Cross-injection 
combustion gas
that provide high 
combustion performance 
during deep throttling
Gas Injection Throttling 
Concept Study 1965  Bendix Corporation  Research 
Engine
 14 lbs rated thrust, 105 
psia rated pc
 Nitrogen gas
 35-to-1  A-50 / N2O4
 Evaluate gas injection 
technique
Multiple 
Chambers
Advanced 
Thrust 
Chamber for 
Space 
Maneuvering 
Propulsion 
Program
1965,
1967
 Rocketdyne
 Air Force Rocket 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 Research 
Engine
 30000 lbs + 3000 lbs 
rated thrust
 2 chambers
 9-to-1  LH2 / LF2
 Investigate an advanced 
space maneuvering 
propulsion system
Multiple 
Chambers N/A
1976 –
1986,
1981 –
1993
 Glushko  RD-170 / 
RD-171
 1777000 lbs rated thrust
 4 chambers  56% to 100%  RP-1 / LO2
 Russian engine used on 
Energia and Zenit vehicles
Multiple 
Chambers N/A 1992 –
1999  Glushko  RD-180  933400 lbs rated thrust
 2 chambers  40% to 100%  RP-1 / LO2
 Russian engine used on 
Atlas III and Atlas V
Pulse Modulation Lunar Flying 
Vehicle Study 1964
 Bell Aerospace 
Company
 NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center
 Bell model 
8414 
Throttleable 
Maneuvering 
Engine
 100 lbs rated thrust, 80 
psia rated pc
 1% to 12% to 
100%
 A-50 / N2O4
 Triplet FOF
 Engine development for use 
in Lunar Flying Vehicle 
Application
Throat Throttling
Reaction 
Motors, Inc. 
Study
1947  Reaction Motors, Inc.
 Navy
  Research 
Engine
 2000 lbs rated thrust, 
315 psia rated pc
 6.25-to-1*
 60%, 75%  Aniline / acid  Design and develop a 
variable thrust LRE
Throat Throttling
MIT Naval 
Supersonic 
Laboratory 
Study
1961
 MIT Naval 
Supersonic 
Laboratory
 Navy
  Research 
Engine
 1800 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc
 N/A  Air
 Investigate throttling by gas 
injection into the nozzle 
throat
Variable Area 
Injector
Variable Thrust 
Engine 
Development 
Program*
1950  Reaction Motors, Inc.  Research 
Engine  5000 lbs rated thrust*  50-to-1*
 Hypergolic with 
WFNA / WFNA*
 Pintle-type injectors*
 Rocket engine development 
to meet the demand for 
more flexibility by 
continuously variable thrust
Variable Area 
Injector
Project MX-
794 1951
 Willow Run Research 
Center University of 
Michigan
 USAF
 Engine 0151
 200 lbs rated thrust, 300 
psia rated pc, 2.75 MR
 600 lbs rated thrust, 300 
psia rated pc
 3000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc
 7.5% to 205%
 35-to-1
 18-to-1
 6-to-1
 80% aniline and 20% 
furfuryl / RFNA-
6.5% NO2
 NH3 / RFNA-20% 
NO2
 J-P3 (lead with 
furfuryl alcohol) / 
WFNA (with max. 
2% H2O)
 J-P4 (lead with 
furfuryl alcohol) / 
WFNA (with max. 
2% H2O)
 Evaluate for missile use

[PDF PAGE 7]
 Swirl, annular orifice, 
multiport swirl 
injectors
Variable Area 
Injector NACA Study 1955
 NACA Lewis Flight 
Propulsion 
Laboratory
 Research 
Engine
 1000 lbs rated thrust, 
300 psia rated pc
 9.6% to 171%
 8.6% to 159%
 Liquid NH3 (with 
lithium) / liquid 
MON-29
 Triplet impinging-jet 
and swirl cup injector
 Investigate variable thrust 
methodology
Variable Area 
Injector
Lunar Module 
Descent Engine 
Program
1963 –
1967
 TRW Inc.
 NASA
 Apollo 
LMDE
 9850 lbs rated thrust, 
106 psia rated pc
 10% to 100%  A-50 / N2O4
 Pintle injector
 Develop and man-rate an 
LMDE
Variable Area 
Injector
TRW Inc. 
Study
1965, 
1968
 TRW Inc.
 NASA  MIRA 150A  150 lbs rated thrust, 108 
psia rated pc, 1.59 MR  18% to 122%
 MMH / MON-10
 A-50 / N2O4
 Coaxial pintle injector
 Design for use as an attitude 
control engine on the 
Surveyor spacecraft
Variable Area 
Injector
Gaseous 
Propellant 
Throttling 
Rocket Engine 
Study
1965 –
1968  AFIT  Research 
Engine
 100 lbs rated thrust, 350 
psia rated pc, 2.0 MR
 70 lbs rated thrust, 230 
psia rated pc
 75 lbs rated thrust, 2.0 
MR
 76 lbs rated thrust
 4.1-to-1
 7-to-1
 5-to-1
 GH2 / GOX
 Research experiments using 
gaseous propellants on 
thrust variation
Variable Area 
Injector LSAM design 2005 –
current
 NGST
 NASA  TR202
 8700 lbs rated thrust, 
700 psia rated pc, 6.0 
MR *
 5.3-to-1*
 Injector and 
chamber tested 
10-to-1
 LH2 / LO2*
 GH2 / LO2 tested
 Engine design to meet 
LSAM requirements
Hydrodynamic-
ally Dissipative 
Injector
Demonstration 
of Throttleable 
LOX/H2
Injection 
Concepts
2001
 The Pennsylvania 
State University
 NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center
 Research 
Engine
 1000 psia rated pc, 6.0 
MR
 10-to-1
 4.83 < MR 
<7.21
 GH2 / LO2
 Russian swirl injector
 Conduct hot-fire 
experiments of a designed 
swirl injector across the 
throttleable range
*Design Only

[PDF PAGE 8]
Figure 1.  Characteristic Velocity Efficiency from Project Thumper
2. Project MX-794 (1950)21
Under contract to the United States Air Force, the Willow Run Research Center at the University of Michigan 
obtained rocket engine throttling performance to analyze and design ballistic and airborne defense systems.   Several 
instabilities were encountered during the test program at lower chamber pressures.  These were described as 
whistling, howling, rough burning, and chugging as the thrust was reduced.  During whistling and howling, the noise 
intensity was high enough to shatter glassware, and standing wave patterns were visible in water on the test cell 
floor.  Whistling was likely a high frequency combustion instability.  Howling and rough burning were likely low 
frequency combustion instability, or chug in current nome nclature.  Chugging was described as an instability with 
pulsing combustion, and was likely a low frequency hydraulic instability in the injector.  Heat transfer in the engine 
rose abruptly during the combustion instabilities.  Performance was observed to decrease during throttling.  
Hysteresis was observed when attempting to move in and out of the regions of instability.  
One conclusion of this program was that unstable combustion was a serious problem in throttling and could 
result in erratic operation and destruction of the rocket engine.  Other conclusions were that a variable area injector 
would likely be required to successfully throttle over a range of 5 -to-1, and that it would be feasible to use 
regenerative cooling over the full 10-to-1 throttling range.  
Several throttling methodologies were also analyzed in these studies.  A table comparing these methods is shown 
in Fig. 2.  Variable area injectors, described in a later section of this paper, were identified to be the most promising 
throttling method.
3. NASA Study – Modified RL10A-1 (1964)28
A modified RL10A-1 engine was used to investigate ste ady state and dynamic characteristics during throttling 
from 100% to 10% of thrust in an altitude facility at the NASA Lewis Research Center.  The modifications to the 
standard regeneratively cooled and pump -fed RL10A-1 engine included the addition of a tu rbine bypass valve to 
vary the amount of flow through the turbine, smaller oxygen injector orifice areas to increase injector pressure drop 

[PDF PAGE 9]
and provide better atomization at low thrust, and a chlorotrifluoraethylene monomer insulation between the oxygen 
and hydrogen injector manifolds to reduce heat transfer that caused oxygen boiling at low thrust.  Analysis indicated 
that rapid transients from high to low thrust could stall the fuel pump.  Emphasis was placed on determining the 
steady and dynamic characteristics as well as the operational limitations due to interacting engine components.  
Three injector configurations were tested, including a shear coax element injector with mid -level oxidizer 
pressure drop (33% chamber pressure), and two swirl coax eleme nt injectors with low (20%) and high (60%) 
oxidizer pressure drops.  All three injector configurations included the injector manifold insulation as well as a 
transpiration cooled faceplate using approximately 2% of the total fuel.
Figure 2.  Chart of Throttling Techniques from Project MX-794
Chug at about 170 Hz was evident at low thrust for all three injectors.  However, the onset of chug occurred at 
lowest chamber pressures with the higher pressure drop injectors, as shown in Fig. 3, although there w as a 
significant influence of mixture ratio between the three injectors.  At a mixture ratio of 4.5, for example, the onset of 
chug occurred at 32% thrust for the lowest pressure drop injector, 25% for the middle -pressure-drop injector, and 
never occurred for the highest pressure drop injector.
The regions of chug shown in Fig. 3 were defined to be any noticeable periodic oscillation greater than the noise 
floor.  The highest amplitude peak -to-peak oscillations of about 80% of chamber pressure occurred at t he lower 
thrust - lower mixture ratio region.  Figure 3 also shows that two of the injectors became stable again at chamber 
pressures less than about 40 psia or around 10% thrust.  This restabilization at very low throttling is due to 
gasification of the oxygen, probably due to heat transfer from the warm hydrogen, at a rate sufficient to increase the 
oxygen pressure drop.  Figure 4 compares oxygen flow rate and pressure drop for the shear coax injector.  The 
deviation from the linear pressure drop relationin the figure indicates a change in oxygen density, and that two-

[PDF PAGE 10]
  
   
a) Low-Pressure-Drop Injector      b) Middle-Pressure-Drop Injector     c) High-Pressure-Drop Injector
Figure 3.  Chug Stability Limits of Three Injector Configurations
Figure 4.  Hydraulic Characteristics while Throttling Liquid Oxygen Shear Coaxial Injector 
phase flow begins to move through the oxidizer injector orifices.  The amount of deviation is shown in Fig. 4 to be 
dependent on the temperature of the hydrogen fuel.   The ad ded injector resistance (increase in pressure drop) was 
enough to overcome the negative effects on stability of the increased compliance (more vapor) in the manifold.  
Several other methods to increase the oxidizer injector pressure drop were also proposed, including further reduction 
of the oxidizer injector area if pump head rise was available, provide heat transfer to increase the amount of vapor in 
the manifold, and provide gas injection into the liquid oxidizer manifold.
The engine was also operated in pressurized mode without the pump.  Chamber pressures of 10 to 15 psia (about 
3% to 5% chamber pressure) were explored over mixture ratios from 2 to 6.  The lower limit of 10 psia was due to 
the inability of the exhaust nozzle to flow full at the available pressure ratio.  High temperatures were reached in the 
jacket outlet temperature at mixture ratios of 5 and higher.  A temperature of 700 R at a mixture ratio of 5 was 
determined to be the safe limit since discoloration, metal erosion, and tube burnouts occurred at higher mixture 
ratios.  These tests demonstrated the feasibility to reach 3% thrust using pressure -fed propellants and inoperative 
pumps.
Reducing the chamber pressure from 100% to 33% reduced the specific impulse by about 3%, but the 
performance decay was faster below 33% chamber pressure.  This influence was expected since for fixed -orifice-
injectors the liquid oxygen pressure drop is reduced with the square of the propellant flow rate, which likely 
worsened atomization and mixing.  Performan ce was also worsened with the onset of chug, which reduced 
performance by an additional 8%.  The high -pressure-drop swirl coax injector performed the best at low thrust 
compared to the other two injectors.  Both swirl injectors also performed better then the shear element injector.  
At a mixture ratio of 5, chamber coolant jacket outlet temperature increased 100 R over the throttling range 
from 100% to 25%.  The increase in temperature was due to the proportionate decrease in propellant flow rate (and 

[PDF PAGE 11]
coolant flow rate) with pressure.  Overall, cooling ability decreased at lower thrusts, however adequate cooling was 
available over the range tested.
In addition to chug, a flow instability between 1 Hz and 5 Hz occurred in the fuel system below chamber 
pressures of 33% thrust, or when the coolant jacket pressure reached the hydrogen critical pressure.  Regions of mild 
oscillations and severe oscillations were evident.  The mild oscillations were 10% to 20% of the fuel weight flow.  
The severe oscillations at high mixture ratios required engine abort because of overheating of the coolant tubes.  
Pump boundary conditions and effects were not a cause because of the demonstration of the phenomenon in engine 
pressurized mode operating without the pump.  The specula tion was that an unstable liquid -vapor interface was 
established in the chamber coolant channels.  The theory was verified when gas helium or hydrogen was injected 
upstream of the coolant jacket, which created a finely distributed region of phase transitio n.  Gas weight flows of 
20% of the hydrogen weight flow were needed for stabilization.  Another method to avoid the oscillation was to 
operate at lower mixture ratios.  
Dynamic characteristics were investigated during thrust transients.  At high decelera tion ramp transients, the 
pump was driven into a stall condition.  This high deceleration ramp created a fuel flow excursion from normal flow 
rates into the stall region.  The flow excursion, as simulated with an analytic system model, showed that the 
accumulator action of the chamber cooling jacket and feed line maintains a high pump discharge pressure while the 
head-rise potential of the pump decays rapidly during the transient.  No operational problems occurred with high 
acceleration ramp transients.
4. ARES Throttling - Scaling Design Study Program (1967)29-32
The Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards Air Force Base sponsored development of a throttleable 
and restartable staged-combustion cycle engine called the Advanced Rocket Engine Storable (ARES) engine at the 
Aerojet General Corporation.  The design goal was 10 -to-1 throttling using a HIPERTHIN (HIgh PERformance 
THrottling INjector) injector33 and a transpiration cooled chamber.  Although no testing was performed, details of 
the design changes from a fixed thrust engine to a throttleable version are provided in the documentation along with 
predictions of stability and performance.
Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company also studied a throttling injector concept applicable to an advanced cryogenic 
engine and suitable for staged combustion engi nes.  The engine system was to be throttleable over a 33 -to-1 thrust 
range.  The unique injector design contained an integral heat exchanger to extend throttling by gasifying the 
cryogenic propellants prior to injection.  The heat exchanger operated by tap ping off combustion gases which were 
directed through a HIPERTHIN injector in a counterflow manner.  Predicting the pressure drop aspects of this 
injection system was difficult because the propellant phase in the injector transitioned from supercritical, t o two-
phase, to gas as the engine throttled down.  With gas injection, the injector maintains a constant pinj/pc over a wide 
range of throttling, which is advantageous to an engine system because adequate feed system stiffness can be 
maintained without using excessive injection pressure drops at full thrust.  Testing of the heat exchanger showed 
nonuniform heat exchange surface in the injector manifold area and insufficient surface area.
5. DC-X and DC-XA (1991)34
The regeneratively cooled expander -cycle RL10A -5 engine, a sea -level throttleable der ivative of the RL10 
engine family, was developed by Pratt & Whitney under contract to McDonnell Douglas through a Ballistic Missile 
Defense Organization funded program, for use on the DC -X (Delta Clipper – Experimental) vehicle, a single-stage 
to orbit roc ket technology demonstrator.  Four RL10A -5 engines were installed on the DC -X vehicle.  The three 
major differences of the RL10A-5 engine from the rest of the RL10 engine family were sea level operation, throttle 
capability from 100% to 30% of rated thrust, and reusability.   NASA later sponsored a continuation of the program 
called DC-XA (Delta Clipper – Experimental Advanced), which used the same engines. 
Several successful flights of the DC -X and DC -XA included vertical launch, hovering, translating, an d vertical 
landing.  One flight reached an altitude of 10,500 ft.  On the third flight, two of the engines started slower than the 
others and resulted in an uneven engine acceleration, but the engines recovered and performed nominally thereafter.  
The prob lem was traced back to gaseous helium unwillingly being ingested into the liquid oxygen feed lines, 
degrading combustion, and lowering thrust.  The RL10A-5 demonstrated a 3.3:1 throttling range.
6. NASA-Aerojet Joint Cooperative Study – RD-0120 (1996)35
Under a joint cooperative agreement with th e NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), the Aerojet Liquid 
Rocket Company in 1996 demonstrated off -nominal power operation of the staged combustion cycle RD -0120 

[PDF PAGE 12]
engine for Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV) evaluations of the X-33 demonstrator vehicle propulsion system.  Rated 
power levels between 25% and 100% were examined, including one test simulating an RLV abort scenario with 
continuous operation at 25% power level of 480 seconds duration.  No combustion instability was observed during 
any power level.  However, following the long duration test at 25% power level, about 20% of the nozzle brackets 
which held the stiffening rings to the nozzle were found to be damaged, attributed to excessive nozzle vibration 
during separated nozzle flow at the sea level facility.  The nozzle was not designed for operation at 25% power 
level, and would be easily redesigned to eliminate damage.  
7. NASA-Boeing Rocketdyne Joint Cooperative Study – SSME (1997)36, 37
Under a joint cooperative agreement with the NASA MSFC, Boeing Rocketdyne in 1997 demonstrated off -
nominal power operation of the staged combustion cycle Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSM E) for RLV evaluations 
of the X-33 demonstrator vehicle propulsion system.   The SSME does not have a higher -than-usual pressure drop; 
however it is classified in this section because at low thrust it still maintains a high enough pressure drop to operate
sufficiently.  Rated power levels of 17%, 22%, 27%, 40%, 45% and 50% were examined.  Normal operation of the 
SSME ranges from 65% to 109% rated power level.  Chamber pressure profiles from two tests are shown in Fig. 5.  
The SSME was recently throttled again in 2008 at the NASA Stennis Space Center.
Figure 5.  SSME Low Power Level Chamber Pressure
Thrust was predominantly controlled by varying the oxidizer preburner oxidizer valve, and mixture ratio was 
controlled by varying the fuel preburner oxidizer v alve.  At low thrust, the chamber coolant valve (CCV) was 
partially closed more so than normally to help increase turbine inlet temperatures, due to a concern for production of 
ice in the oxy gen preburner.  However, higher -than-expected nozzle separation heat loads in combination with the 
CCV modification precluded icing concerns.  The mixture ratio also was fixed between 3 and 4 to provide a safe 
margin from the high pressure fuel turbopump boilout point (or stall), which also provided additional cooling o f the 
main combustion chamber at low thrust.  The stall point was the most significant issue that drove the operating point 
balance.    
Reduction of the thrust to 17% (or about 6.4:1 throttling from maximum power level) was achieved by further 
closing of the fuel preburner oxidizer valve, since the oxidizer preburner oxidizer valve was already at a minimum 
area.  High sample rate instrumentation did not include a chamber pressure measurement; however, there was no 
evidence of combustion instability in acce lerometer measurements.  The oxidizer injector pressure drop was so 
small that the measurements from the test data were not valid, but the pressure drops across the control valves were 
high and possibly protected against chug.  A pump flow test program was recommended to establish safe operating 
regimes for the pumps at thrusts lower than 17%.
There were many pump-related concerns prior to running the throttling tests, including rotordynamic stability of 
the turbopumps, running the high pressure turbopumps at shaft critical speeds, the ability of the high pressure fuel 
turbopump thrust bearing to lift off, the ability of the hydrostatic bearing of the high pressure oxidizer turbopump to 
run in the stall region, the possibility of the freezing in the high pre ssure turbopump turbines, the ability to sustain a 
satisfactory axial thrust balance, the bi -stability of the high pressure oxidizer turbopump boost pump, and the 
performance of the turbopumps at low flow -to-speed ratios.  A slight preburner boost pump bi -stability was 
observed at 50% rated power level.

[PDF PAGE 13]
8. Deep Throttling Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (2005)38, 39
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne conducted tests of a modified RL10 engine, assembled from a mixture of heritage 
development hardware and renamed the Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) Demonstrator.  The engine 
is for technology development and risk reduction applicable to a deep t hrottling cryogenic lunar descent engine.  
Figure 6 shows the engine at multiple power levels during a hot run.  
Figure 6. CECE shown at Multiple Power Levels
Two major hardware modifications to the RL10 engine system were made for CECE.  First, features of the 
injector were altered to allow adequate operation over the full throttling regime.  This included a reduction in area of 
the oxidizer flow path and a reduction of the outer row mixture ratio.  These changes allowed full operation over the 
throttling range and improved thermal margin.  The fuel -side flow area was similar to a base RL10 engine and 
needed little modification.  T he second modification was the selection of a valve suite that provided the necessary 
system control flexibility.  The valve suite used in CECE is discussed in more detail in [ 38] and [39], however two 
key additions were the fuel turbine bypass flow to supplement the existing bypass flow route and the addition of the 
variable area cavitating venturi.
Over the Demo. 1.0, Demo. 1.5, and Demo. 1.6 test series, CECE has accumulated 5032 seconds of total run 
time while achieving a throttle range in excess of 13-to-1. Figure 7 shows CECE at 30% power level with ice 
formation on the nozzle rim due to the cooling and eventual freezing of the steam by the cryogenically cooled nozzle 
wall. Swirl injector throttling, like the RL10 and CE CE throttling configuration, has also been recently studied in 
[40] including effects of reduced mass flow rate and elevated chamber backpressure.  

[PDF PAGE 14]
Figure 7. CECE at 30% Power Levels Showing Ice Formation
Chug oscillations were encountered at l ow throttle power levels similar to that observed in [ 28] and [41].  The 
presence of vapor in the oxidizer manifold and feed system was deduced by extensive stability modeling as 
responsible for the less than expected margin.  An injector revision that incorporated insulation in the LOX manifold 
was tested in Demo. 1.6 similar to the injector revision in [ 28].  The insulation provided additional chug margin by 
effectively decreased the onset of chug to a lower power level .  Also, the approach of gaseous helium injection 
similar to that used in [28] was also examined.  The gas injection was successful in eliminating chug oscillations.
B. Dual-Manifold Injectors
A dual -manifold injector – also called two -stage, dual -element, dual -circuit, or dual -orifice – is an injector 
designed to maintain satisfactory injector pressure drops at low thrust levels while not requiring the often excessive 
pressure drops at full thrust compare d to the high -pressure-drop injectors described in the previous section.  The 
dual-manifold injector essentially combines two fixed-area injectors into a common structure, with independent feed 
systems controlling flow to each injector manifold.  Deep thro ttling is achieved by proceeding from two -manifold 
(primary and secondary) operation at high thrust to single-manifold (primary) operation at low thrust, thus changing 
the effective injection area.  Changing from two -manifold to single -manifold operation i s usually as simple as 
closing a valve.  Several constraints must be optimized in the injector design from system requirements, including 
the pressure drop at the minimum power point, the minimum pressure drop for the secondary manifold, and the 
maximum injector pressure at full power (maximum thrust).  This injection method has been used for fuel injection 
in turbojet engines, and also by German engineers in the early days of throttling LRE development. 19
Higher pressure drop across the injector at low thrust is advantageous for both performance and stability, as 
previously described.  Finer atomization of the propellants usually depends on higher injector pressure drop.42  The 
injector stiffness to promote stable combustion is injector dependent, but generally should be at least 15% to 20% of 
the chamber pressure.   
Just like with the high-pressure-drop injectors previously described, continuous throttling is provided by control 
valves in the propellant feed systems.  At the operating point where the pressure drop in the secondary manifold 
reaches its minimum, the control valve feeding the secondary manifold closes, and all the flow transitions to the 
primary manifold.  This abrupt reduction in injection area causes an abrupt increase in injector pressure drop across 
the primary manifold when flow rate is held constant.  The transition historically has ranged between 20% and 50% 
of full flow.  Studies have been performed to examine ways of smoothly transitioning by varying flow through both 
manifolds appropriately.  
1. Advanced Throttling Concepts Study (1963)43-45
An Advanced Throttling Concept Study (1963 -1965) was conducted by Pratt & Whitney Aircraft (P&WA) and 
United Technology Center and a parallel High Energy Advanced Throttlin g Concept Study (1964 -1966) was 
conducted by Pratt & Whitney Aircraft under two separate Air Force contracts.  Prior to these studies, P&WA 
sponsored tests of a dual -manifold subscale injector over a 23 -to-1 flow range with the same propellants as 
described in the Advanced Throttling Concept Study.  The intent of the Advanced Throttling Concept Study was to 
evaluate injector systems that provide high combustion performance during deep throttling (specified down to 50-to-
1).  The engine was pressure -fed and used storable propellants.  Two injector patterns were examined in this study; 
the triplet-element injector is shown in Fig. 8.  

[PDF PAGE 15]
a) Hardware Photo b) Schematic Diagram
Figure 8.  Triplet-Element Dual-Manifold Injector
Each individual pr opellant orifice consisted of a primary flow inner orifice and a secondary flow concentric 
outer orifice, as illustrated in Fig. 9.  A flow divider valve controlled the flow split between the primary and 
secondary flow paths.  High average injection veloci ties were maintained over a wide thrust range by the 
controllable flow split and the momentum exchange between the two concentric streams, high enough to obtain 
good inter-propellant mixing.   The primary flow accelerates the low secondary flow (even as lo w as 2% thrust) as 
was demonstrated in water flow experiments.   Acoustic liners on the chamber walls were also used to damp high 
frequency chamber pressure oscillations.
Figure 9.  Dual-Manifold Injection Flow System Schematic
System analyses prior to test found that the pressure inside the secondary oxidizer manifold would be below the 
propellant vapor pressure at low thrust.  In the transition thrust range (with two -phase propellant) and pure vapor 
thrust range at low power levels, there would be significant change in the primary-to-secondary flow split, but only a 
small effect on total propellant flow, so the presence of vapor in the oxidizer secondary manifold was expected to 
have a negligible effect on mixture ratio and chamber pressure.  A nonlinear dynamic system model also showed no 
divergent oscillations in the chamber within the entire thrust range and was useful to design optimum propellant 
supply line geometry.  Performance and throttling characteristics of both injectors are limited release data.
The intent of the High Energy Advanced Throttling Concept Study was to evaluate the throttling capability and 
performance of the dual-orifice injectors using high energy F2/H2 pump-fed propulsion systems for use in 
maneuvering satellite applications.  Tests were performed with several subscale and full scale injectors with dual-
manifold concentric injector orifices and upstream flow control valves as in the Advanced Throttling Concept Study.  
The subscale injectors were throttled over a 12:1 thrust range.  The full scale injectors were throttled over a 29:1 
thrust range.  Gaseous hydrogen was used as the fuel and thus only the oxidizer dual-manifold was needed.  

[PDF PAGE 16]
2. Chamber Technology for Space Storable Propellants (1964)46-49
A five year analytical and experimental program called Chamber Technology for Space Storable Propellants 
investigated dual -manifold injector throttling.  The program was to develop design criteria for selected space 
storable fuels in combinat ion with oxygen difluoride.  FLOX (70% fluorine, 30% oxygen) was experimentally 
verified as an excellent simulant for oxygen difluoride in terms of performance and heat transfer and was substituted 
as an oxidizer in most tests because of its lower cost. Th e injector contained dual manifolds for both fuel and 
oxidizer.  The transition to primary-only flow occurred at 49% thrust. The engine repeatedly throttled over a 10-to-1 
range in a variety of duty cycles including demonstration of continuous throttling. The c* efficiency ranged from 
92% to 98% over the thrust range.  
Two valve flow control schemes, parallel and series as shown in Fig. 10, were investigated.  The parallel valve 
scheme allowed control of the flow to both the primary and secondary manifold s simultaneously.  At the transition 
chamber pressure, the secondary flow was cut off and the single throttle valve fully opened.  The difficulty with this 
simple parallel system was that four valves were needed to operate simultaneously to ensure a smooth thrust change 
at transition.  The series valve scheme provided independent flow control to each manifold propellant line.  
Throttling began by reducing secondary flow with the primary valve still fully opened.  Upon closure of the 
secondary valve, the pri mary flow was reduced to continue throttling.  The series scheme provided a performance 
advantage at the mid-thrust range prior to throttling down through the predetermined chamber pressure.
One case of instability occurred with rough combustion at 90% thr ust and 170 Hz and a peak -to-peak chamber 
pressure oscillation of 13%.  This oscillation was eliminated upon closure of the secondary injector control valve.  
Release of trapped injector purge gases between the fuel throttle valve and injector likely triggered the instability by 
passing two-phase flow through the injection orifices.  A change to the fuel injector purge pneumatic system was 
made for subsequent tests and no further instabilities were encountered.  Otherwise, all thrust levels demonstrated 
excellent stability.  
Peak performance occurred at secondary flow cut-off when there was a maximum injector pressure drop, or high 
injection velocity.  The performance curve using the series valve configuration is shown in Fig. 11.  An empirical 
correlation was developed that related injector design parameters to the combustion efficiency, based on an 
empirical expression by Ingebo 50 that related volume mean droplet dia meter, D30, to jet diameter D and velocity V
for impinging stream injectors.  The relationship is Eq. (2),
1
B
c
DA V 
      
(2)
where A and B were empirical constants whose values changed for different propellant combinations and chamber 
geometries.  The primary and secondary systems can be combined into a mass weighted average c* efficiency.  
Additionally, no variation in the Rupe mixing efficiency, Em,51 was shown over the entire throttle range.
      
a) Parallel Scheme    b) Series Scheme
Figure 10.  Dual-Manifold Flow Control Schemes

[PDF PAGE 17]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
17
Figure 11.  Dual-Manifold Throttling Performance with Series Valve Configuration
The system response in general was good although there was a significant delay when traversing from low thrust 
to high thrust because of the need to prime the secondary manifold.  This would have to be corrected for fast thrust 
response missions.  Continuously flowing fluid through the secondary manifold – either by a bleed flow through the 
secondary valve or a bleed flow from the primary fluid flow – was proposed to reduce the response during 
transition.
The throttling heat transfer results suggested the boundary layer in the nozzle region would transition from 
turbulent to transitional and/or laminar some time during the throttling range.  
3. Reusable Rocket Engine Program (1967)52-63
Pratt & Whitney contracted with the U. S. Air Force over several years in the late 1960s and early 1970s to 
develop a reusable advanced cryogenic staged combustion engine.  The initial configuration of this engine was 
required to throttle 5-to-1 and deliver 96% theoretical specific impulse at nominal thrust and 94% during throttling.  
Consequently the injectors included dual -manifold systems in both oxidizer circuits of the preburner and main 
injectors, and a variable area system in the fuel circuit of the preburner injector.  Both injectors used oxidizer 
tangential-entry swirl coaxial element designs with dual-inlets, with the main injector including two tangential inlets 
(also called a “stacked” configuration) and the preburner injector including one tangential inlet and one axial (not 
self-atomizing) inlet.  Testing in component and staged combustion configurations revealed stable operation over the 
5-to-1 range as well as dynamic stability demonstrated by combustion chamber pulse guns with up to 80 grains of 
explosive.  However, the use of both dual -manifold oxidizer and variable -geometry fuel systems in the preburner 
was found to be difficult to control, the variable area fuel circuit experienced mechanical problems, and the hot gas 
temperature profile variability exceeded requirements.  The specific impulse efficiency of the main injector also was 
about 93% at 100% power level, and about 90% at 20% power level, which also did not meet requirements.  The c* 
efficiencies were about 98% and 96% at nominal and throttled conditions.  
A subsequent phase of this program, with an engine renamed the XLR -129, modified both the preburner and 
main injector in an attempt to satisfy these requirements, including a modification for 99% c* efficiency at rated 
thrust and 97% efficiency during throttling.  The design for the main injector eliminated the dual-inlet (or “stacked”) 
oxidizer circuit and used one major flow passage.  The design for the preburner eliminated the variable area fuel 
system in favor of a fixed fuel area, but modified the dual -manifold oxidizer circuit from one tangential inlet and 
one axial inlet to two tangential inlets.  This preburner configuration is shown in Fig. 12, and the dual -inlet oxidizer 
swirl coaxial injector element is shown in Fig. 13.  Extensive cold flow testing of dozens of preburner element 
design configurations was conducted to develop a hydrodynamically stable flow over the 5-to-1 operating range.

[PDF PAGE 18]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
18
    a) Complete Injector                      b) Close-up of Oxidizer Dual-Manifold Configuration 
Figure 12.  XLR-129 Dual-Manifold Preburner Configuration
Figure 13.  XLR-129 Dual-Inlet Swirl Coax Oxidizer Element
     Initial testing of the preburner showed satisfactory hot gas temperature profile variability, but chug was 
encountered at 20% power level with amplitudes about 11% of chamber pressure and frequencies between 75 H z 
and 150 Hz.  Development analysis and testing indicated the chug was caused by two factors – low secondary circuit 
LOX pressure drop and excessive secondary LOX manifold volume.  Oxygen flowed through both oxidizer circuits 
over the entire throttling range, so that at low power levels, pressure drop in the secondary manifold was reduced to 
a few percent of chamber pressure.  The chug was never eliminated even by increasing the primary flow split to 90% 
and increasing the mass -weighted percent pressure dro p to nearly 60%.  Preburner pressure oscillations were 
postulated to bypass the high -pressure-drop primary flow and drive the system from the secondary flow.  This did 
not happen during the initial phase of the program with a different inlet configuration, even with mass -weighted 
pressure drops as low as 4% of chamber pressure.  A reduction of the secondary manifold by 20% -40% was 
predicted to stabilize the system, and during component development a redesigned injector with reduced LOX 
manifold volumes in b oth primary and secondary circuits operated without chug at the 20% power level, although 
during many tests there was leakage between the primary and secondary circuits.
4. Throttleable Primary Injector for Staged Combustion Engine Program (1968)64
Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company under contract to the Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory demonstrated a 
throttleable main injector for a staged -combustion cycle, space engine using storable propellants and a platelet 
HIPERTHIN injector.33  The engine concept was designed to operate over a 10 -to-1 throttling range.  Four injector 
configurations were tested, including three single manifold injectors – showerhead oxidizer/showerhead fuel, 
showerhead oxidizer/impinging fuel, and impinging oxidizer/impinging fuel – and one dual -manifold injector with 
impinging oxidizer/impinging fuel.  The dual -manifold injector consisted of two fuel manifolds and two oxidizer 
manifolds with independent platelet circuits for each manifold, as illustrated in Fig. 14.
To achieve the full 10 -to-1 throttling range, the main injector include d dual manifolds in both fuel and oxidizer 
circuits, although only a single manifold would be used at low thrust for fuel and oxidizer.  The lowest throttling 
points were stable using single manifolds in both fuel and oxidizer.  Chug with peak -to-peak amplitudes 44% of 
chamber pressure at 54 Hz to 115 Hz occurred when a dual manif old was used with one propellant, although dual 
manifolds at low thrust was not the normal configuration.  Performance was favorable showing as good as or better 
than the other single manifold designs at the tested mixture ratios, due to the increased atom ization of the higher 
velocity elements producing more momentum exchange at the higher pressure drops.

[PDF PAGE 19]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
19
Figure 14.  HIPERTHIN Platelet Dual-Manifold Injector Design
5. Advanced Expander Test Bed Program (1990)65-71
Pratt & Whitney was contracted by NASA to develop and demonstrate the Advanced Expander Test Bed 
(AETB), an expander cycle oxygen-hydrogen engine technology applicable for space engines.  Among many other 
features, the AETB was to have a high degree of thr ottleability with a requirement of 5-to-1 and a goal of 20 -to-1.  
Design of the dual -manifold injector had been completed previously in an in -house Pratt & Whitney Space Engine 
Component Technology Program.  Only the oxygen circuit used a dual manifold; th e fuel flowed through a single 
manifold.  The two oxygen streams mixed within the injector element.  A lumped parameter electrical circuit 
analogy analysis of the feed system predicted no chug at 5%, 10%, and 20% thrust.  Part of the AETB program 
evolved into a separate technology development NASA Space Act Agreement.  This program involved testing a 25 
Klbf Thrust Chamber Assembly designed for 20 -to-1 throttling capability using the same AETB dual -manifold 
injector design.  Testing took place in 1996 at NA SA Marshall Space Flight Center; however the data are currently 
Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne proprietary. 
C. Gas Injection
Gas injection into the propellants, also referred to as foamed -flow or propellant aeration, is a throttling 
methodology for LREs that red uces the bulk density of the propellants by introducing a much lower density 
(sometimes inert) fluid into the propellant flow.  The change in flow rate is typically small.  For liquid flows at 
constant flow rate, the pressure drop is inversely proportional to the bulk density.  Thus with gas injection at a 
particular thrust level, the liquid circuit injector pressure drop is increased.  The higher pressure drop increases the 
chug stability margin thrust range and may increase the performance for fixed -geometry injectors.  However, 
Russian experience reports that gas injection can lead to the onset of high frequency pressure fluctuations.4
1. NACA Research (1956) 72
A research memorandum published in 1957 by the NACA Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory demonstrated 
rocket thrust variation with foamed storable propellants using helium as the foaming gas.  Several qualitative tests of 
the gas-injection device were made in water.  The final helium injector device consisted of a two inch long tube with 
eleven circles of twenty small holes.  Careful calibration of the device was necessary to obtain smooth homogeneous 
injection and to prevent surges of gas into the liquid.  For this system, helium pressure no more than 100 psi greater 
than the liquid pressure was allowed to obtain smooth helium injection.
A theoretical model was developed that calculated the reduction in liquid flow as a function of gas -to-liquid 
ratio.  The model considered isothermal gas flow under thermal equilibrium and separately, adiabatic flow assuming 
no energy exchange between the gas and liquid.  Less gas injection was shown to be needed at a particular thrust 
level with a denser liquid propellant flo w.  Gas injection for thrust variation was shown to be a feasible technique 
that did not impair combustion efficiency.  

[PDF PAGE 20]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
20
However, several concerns expressed included evaluation of the weight penalty of an additional propellant and 
its associated hardware, and that discharge coefficients and heat transfer characteristics for a foamed fluid at various 
conditions would need to be characterized.  The importance of keeping the pressure difference between the liquid 
and gas at a low value was necessary to produce homogenous, uniform, and stable foams.  Water flow experiments 
showed that a large pressure difference created intermittent liquid flows, which could create low frequency 
combustion instability.
2. NASA Study – Modified RL10A-1 (1964)28, 41
During throttling te sts of a modified RL10A -1 at the NASA LeRC, described in a previous section, chug 
occurred at thrust levels higher than expected due to oxygen boiling in the manifold.  The sources of the boiling 
were from increased fuel temperatures in the adjacent manifold along with reduced oxygen saturation temperatures.  
Videos were taken of the liquid oxygen manifold through a sapphire window.  For a particular chug oscillation 
cycle, oxygen vapor bubbles were observed to form inside the liquid oxygen manifold and then collapse at the same 
frequency as the chamber oscillations.  A sequence of events postulated for this coupled dynamic system was as 
follows:  1) bubbles began to appear and the liquid oxygen manifold pressure dropped; 2) as the size and number of 
bubbles increased, the bulk density decreased and the injector pressure drop increased; 3) atomization improved and 
the chamber pressure increased; 4) liquid oxygen flow was reduced and manifold pressure increased; 5) bubbles 
condensed back into the liquid, which reduced the pressure drop and worsened atomization and lowered chamber 
pressure; 6) manifold pressure reduced because of an increased liquid oxygen flow, 7) bubbles began to appear 
again and the cycle is repeated.
To eliminate chug, gaseous oxygen or helium was injected into the liquid oxygen propellant line at the manifold 
inlet flange to produce a foamed liquid of reduced density.  The gas was injected through a vacant instrument port 
and no attempt was made to distribute the gas or control the bubble si ze.  Video into the manifold showed that the 
bubbles were too fine to see and appeared as a fog.  Helium injection of approximately 0.4% of the liquid oxygen 
weight flow, or oxygen injection of 4% of the liquid oxygen weight flow, eliminated chug over the entire 10-to-1 
throttling range.  Differences in required flows were due to the difference in gas volumes as well as condensation of 
some of the gaseous oxygen.
Gas injection restored the performance lost by the chug.  In one case, a 7.5% increase in pinj/pc to a value of 
15% pinj/pc eliminated chug at 22% thrust.  The increase in pressure drop to stabilize the combustion with injected 
gas agreed with the increase in pressure drop required without gas.  Helium was also injected into the oxygen 
manifold at rated thrust levels to see if that improved performance, but only a negligible increase was noted.    
3. Advanced Throttling Concepts Study (1964)43, 73
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft also studied a gas injection technique called cross-injection, in which small amounts of 
storable fuel were injected into the storable oxidizer propellant line and small amounts of oxidizer were injected into 
the fuel propellant line, which produced combustion gas in the propellant lines.  The propellant line pressures were 
increased which improved throttling capability.
Two operational modes were considered using a fixed area injector.  In the first mode, an appropriate mixture 
ratio (for the secondary cross injected flow) was determined for a particular thrust that provided a temperature and 
pressure ris e in the propellant line at that thrust level.  A significant pressure drop was established across the 
injector.  However, since the secondary line pressure remained constant as the propellant flows increased, the 
pressure drop increase returned to that of a fixed injector case, so that this mode was only beneficial over a small 
thrust range.
The second mode requires control of the secondary propellant flow.  The secondary mixture ratio was held 
constant over a thrust range (2% to ~20% in this case).  The disadvantage was that this required a more complicated 
flow control, but it would maintain high injection pressures and velocities over the range of interest.  Figures 15 and 
16 show the effect on injection pressure drop considering a small amount of second ary oxidizer flow into the 
primary fuel line.
The cross -injection technique was hot -fire tested with an injector in the secondary line that provided a 90
hollow spray pattern in water flow giving fine atomization.  Secondary propellant flow mixture ratio s were ranged 
from 0.003 to 0.009 for the fuel -into-oxidizer case and 147 to 525 for the oxidizer -into-fuel case.  Repeatable and 
stable results were demonstrated, with only very small amplitude oscillations evident at 10 Hz and 170 Hz.  

[PDF PAGE 21]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
21
Figure 15. System Pressures versus Fuel Flow 
Rate with a Constant Secondary Mixture Ratio
 Figure 16. System Pressures versus Fuel Flow 
Rate with a Constant Secondary Oxidizer 
Pressure
4. Throttling Concept Study (1965)74
The Bendix Co rporation investigated the gas injection technique using nitrogen gas with a storable propellant 
injector.  A throttle range of 35 -to-1 was demonstrated with nitrogen, and a 50 -to-1 throttle range was considered 
possible using helium gas instead of nitroge n.  Combustion was stable and efficiency was preserved over the entire 
throttle range.  This concept evolved into the Bimode Bipropellant Attitude Control System which was capable of 
both pulsing and continuous throttling.  Attitude control motors normally use maximum thrust to maneuver the 
vehicle.  However, stabilization, being a much more complex mode, in general would benefit greatly from a varying 
thrust capability. The Bimode concept keeps the advantage of short duration, maximum amplitude, thrust pulses that 
result in the maximum unaccelerated coasting time.
5. Other Engines
The Rocketdyne SE -10 engine, a competitor to the variable area injector design for the Apollo lunar descent 
engine, used the helium gas injection at low thrust to enable deep thrott ling.3, 19, 75   However a 200 Hz to 500 Hz 
chug at low thrust as well as intermittent popping remained present with and without the helium injection.  
Additional problems with self-induced first tangential modes occurred early in developmental tests, which were 
solved by implementing a Y-shaped baffle arrangement.76  
Attitude control thrusters and other very small thrusters (with thrusts of near 1 lb77)use the gas injection 
technique to not necessarily increase the injector resistance to enable deep throttling, but to alter the total flow rate.  
This is possible because at low thrust, the flow change due to the inception of gas is not negligible like at high 
thrust.
D. Multiple Chambers
The principle of throttling with multiple chambers is through stopping flow through one or more chambers or 
varying the thrust of each chamber independently.  A deeper throttling can be obtaine d by independently throttling 
multiple chambers by a small amount.  This concept is primarily used in aerospike engines but has been used in 
other rocket engine systems as well.  Disadvantages include feed system complexity and additional weight, as well 
as managing propellants and thrust transients during each engine startup or shutdown.19  
Russian engines often use this feature for reasons other than strictly for throttling.3, 78  It was experienced that 
small diameter combustion chambers solved stability problems exhibited in larger diameter chambers.  With 
multiple chambers, each chamber diameter can be reduced.  Additionally, smaller parts were easier to manufacture, 
there was an improved capability to provide thrust vectoring, and the engine overall length was reduced.  The 
'engine-out' reliability was said to be increased because one or more thrust chambers could be shut off and the total 
thrust could be maintained by increasing the thrust of the other chambers.  Multiple chambers do not provide the 
optimum engine weight.

[PDF PAGE 22]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
22
1. Advanced Thrust Chamber for Space Maneuvering Propulsion Program (1965)79-84
The Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards Air Force Base sponsored a Rocketdyne study in 1965 
to investigate a space maneuvering propulsion system to be used f or satellite intercept or rendezvous.  The engine 
design included multiple concentric regeneratively cooled thrust chambers.  Two multiple chamber concepts were 
combined in one engine study.  The first concept was the aerospike engine which could be thrott led and contained 
many small chambers and nozzles.  The second concept was to have a standard chamber and bell type nozzle inside 
of the separate aerospike engine.  The outer primary thrust chamber was a toroidal aerospike, divided into segments, 
producing 30 Klbf thrust, while the secondary inner thrust chamber included a bell nozzle producing 3.3 Klbf thrust.  
The development focused on the primary chamber because of the unique toroidal features of the aerospike 
chamber.  It included testing of a full size segment that was 1/47th of the toroid circumference.  Short duration tests 
were performed over a chamber pressure range from 300 to 600 psia, and combustion efficiency remained high.
Analysis and design for the follow -up Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology Advanced Development 
Program was initiated in 1967.  The final engine configuration is shown in Fig. 1 7.  Both the 3.3 Klbf chamber and 
the 30 Klbf chamber would throttle 9 -to-1, providing a total effective throttling ratio of approximately 81 -to-1.    
Combustion was stable during hot fire tests of the outer primary chamber segments over a chamber pressure range 
from 650 psia to 72 psia.  Dynamically stable combustion was demonstrated with pulse gun testing.  Combustion 
efficiency ranged from 98% to 100% over the entire throttling range of the tested segment.
Figure 17. Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology 
Advanced Development Engine
2. Other engines
Many Russian engines have employed multiple chambers, although primarily for combustion s tability and 
manufacturability.35  The recent RD-170 and RD-171 engines with four thrust chambers and the RD -180 with two 
thrust chambers each include one turbopump with each engine system.  The RD-170 and RD171 provide 1,777 Klbf
vacuum thrust and can throttle to 56% of maximum thrust, while the RD-180 provides 933.4 Klbf vacuum thrust and 
can throttle to 40% thrust.
E. Pulse Modulation
Pulse modulation, short for Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM), is used predominantly in monopropellant engines.  
PWM is on -off cycling that provides a quasi -steady state average thrust.  PWM in LREs has its roots in pulse jet 
engines.  The German V-1 guided missile developed in Peenemünde contained a pulse jet engine that was flown for 
military purposes in 1942 and most well known for the London bombing in 1944, and was also known as the ‘buzz 
bomb’ because of the low frequency sputtering sound caused by set frequency pulses at 100 Hz and a resonant 
combustion response at roughly 50 Hz.  The air intake shutters closed as the fuel ignited and gas expanded for a 
short duration.85, 86

[PDF PAGE 23]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
23
Pulse Detonation Engines (PDEs) are a similar recent technology, except that PDEs detonate the fuel and 
oxidizer mixture while the flow is supersonic.  While the PDE combustion process is more effi cient than PWM, 
there have been difficulties converting the energy into efficient thrust.  
The primary issues related to PWM are fast response valves and low performance.  However, PWM is 
advantageous when small thrust corrections are needed such as in s atellite rendezvous.  Throttling with PWM is 
accomplished with tailoring of the thrust and durations of the pulses.  Other disadvantages are shock loading on the 
vehicle, heat soak in the chamber head end, inefficient use of propellant due to chamber cooling channel and injector 
dribble volume losses between pulses. 19  Additionally, the igniting each pulse can be difficult especially for very 
short pulse widths.
1. NASA Studies (1959)87, 88
A 1959 NASA report examines rendezvous scenarios between two satellites, assuming that one satellite is 
maneuverable with velocity increments tangential to the orbit.   Pulsed thrust was considered for the several 
maneuvers required for various rendezvous scenarios.  The use of fixed -duration thrust pulses, in which pulses 
provide the necessary total V or total amount of thrust necessary to complete a maneuver, was sli ghtly different 
from the PWM methodology, which uses numerous pulses at a particular frequency and pulse width to provide an 
average specific impulse and thrust profile.  However, the single impulsive thrust maneuver capability was 
developed initially for use in satellite maneuvering.
In 1961 NASA examined a PWM methodology to evaluate a linear system for applying thrust to a maneuverable 
vehicle in the terminal phase of a rendezvous.  The throttleability limitations of an existing rocket engine are not 
necessarily a major obstacle to the system design of a maneuverable satellite.  However, maneuverable satellites, 
such as for terminal phase rendezvous systems, would need to employ systems that would average out to be the 
same thrust as can be performed with a continually variable thrust engine, as illustrated in Fig. 1 8.  The average 
thrust needed to complete a mission, for example, is shown in the first inset.  The second inset gives an effective 
throttling approach by using pulse modulation of a constant width but with variable thrust.  The third inset gives an 
effective throttling approach by using pulse modulation of variable width but constant thrust.  Both methods can be 
designed to provide the same thrust profile.  
Figure 18. Pulse-Width Modulation Throttling Approaches
2. Lunar Flying Vehicle Study (1964)89
Bell Aerospace Company began development of a 100-to-1 variable thrust engine in 1964, called the Bell model 
8414 Throttleable Maneuvering Engine, for earth orbit, lunar, and planetary spacecraft maneuvering propulsion 
systems.  This engine system combined a continually varying thrust engine and a pulse engine to provide continuous 
throttling and pulse operation capabilities with maximum performance at highest thrust, where most of the 
propellant would be consumed.  Deep throttling and pulsing performance could be provided without compromising 
the high thrust performance. 
A single fixed-type injector was optimized over the entire thrust range to maintain adequate injection velocities 
and injector pressure drops for efficient and stable combustion.  Gas-injection methods were rejected because of the 
increased complexity and system weight penalty and dual -manifold and variable area injector methods were also 
rejected as too complex since most of the time the engine operated at high thrust.
A six-element triplet injector was optimized for performance and pulse response – enough elements for high 
performance and few enough to minimize manifolding volumes for maximum pulse response and pulse 
performance.  Two independent valves were used, a throttling valve and a bipropellant variable area cavitating 
venturi with an actuation time of 5 milliseconds attached directly to the manifold.

[PDF PAGE 24]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
24
Continuous throttle, without pulsing, was achieved down to 12% of rated thrust.  Combustion was controllable, 
stable, and reproducible.  Combustion performance was 94% at rated thrust with maximum specific impulse at 87% 
thrust.  Pulse performance was measured from 100% to 20% rated thrust using pulse durations of 150 msec.  
Ignition spikes reached a maximum 300% of the rated pressure.
Figure 19 compares the performance curve for pulsing at a set thrust with continuous throttling of a set thrust and 
illustrates one of the disadvantages of PWM.  There was a major degradation in performance at a specific thrust 
level due to the short duration time and transient event of the pulse.  How much less performance an integrated 
thrust of the pulse would be compared to a steady state set point of equivalent average thrust was not clear, although 
it was still expected to be lower due to lower performing conditions during the transient.  With even shorter pulses, 
there is more degradation in performance.  
  
   
    a) Comparison of Steady b) Steady Performance c) Pulsing Performance at
         and Pulsing Performance     150 msec Pulse-Width
Figure 19.  Pulsing Performance Comparisons
The program demonstrated the feasibility of combining single injector throttling with PWM to extend the thrust 
to deep throttling of 100 -to-1.  Figure 2 0 shows the performance over the range of thrust with continuous variable 
thrust down to 12% thrust and PWM down to 1% thrust.
Figure 20. Dual-Mode Throttling Performance 
3. The Bendix Corporation Study (1965)74
The Bendix Corporation reviewed the state-of-the-art techniques of pulsing and variable area throttling in 1965.  
The pulsing techniques in cluded problems such as low combustion efficiency, high electrical power consumption, 
low response, materials problems, and unwieldy configurations.  Specific impulse was reduced when operating in a 
regime that required short pulse widths.  The repeatabili ty and consistency of engine performance was dictated by 
the control and minimization of fuel usage by the pulsing accuracy.  At that time, varying pulse widths using a 
single thrust level was not successful and pulsing accuracy was not achieved. 

[PDF PAGE 25]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
25
F. Throat Throttling
The throat throttling method appears to have been one of the first methods to throttle LREs.  Two approaches 
were defined, including use of a cooled mechanical pintle inserted and retracted through the nozzle throat, and 
injection of a gas into t he throat region.  Both methods effectively changed the throat area by providing some 
blockage into the flow field.  Both modes have a net effect on decreasing thrust, since at constant propellant 
pressures, a throat restriction causes an increase in chamb er pressure and hence lower injection pressure drops and 
reduced propellant flow rates.  Because of the high chamber pressures at low thrust, there is an associated maximum 
theoretical performance at low thrust.  The major concerns are excessive vibrations and heat transfer of the pintle.  
Other issues are that the injector design must provide high injection pressure drops at full flow conditions to 
maintain minimum pressure drops at low flow rates.  Another disadvantage is the high pressure propellant feed
system necessary.  
1. Reaction Motors, Inc. Study (1947)90
Reaction Motors, Inc. (RMI) developed a small acid -aniline propellant variable thrust LRE using a throat 
throttling device called a bulb or restrictor to vary the area of the throat, as shown in Fig. 2 1.  The throat area was 
varied by inserting and retracting the restrictor, which was internally cooled by fuel through the center shaft and the 
restrictor bulb since materials that could withstand the temperature were not available to allow an uncooled design.  
The fuel was then fed into the injector elements.  The nozzle and chamber walls were cooled by the oxidizer, which 
was then also fed into the injector elements.
  
Figure 21.  Reaction Motors, Inc. Restrictor Device
With a varying throat area needed for a throttle range of 6.25-to-1, the L* also varied from 43.5 in. to 272 in.  A 
compromise L* design range was chosen for a single constant volume chamber.  Propellant flow rate wa s also 
controlled to maintain constant chamber pressure based on the nozzle throat area using a closed loop control system.
The nozzle throat area was originally varied with a restrictor bulb that gave poor expansion ratio characteristics 
at low thrust, but this was later improved.   Large vibrations occurred in one test thought to be due to injector valve 
flutter.  Stiffer propellant valve springs were to be incorporated in future designs.  Only a few tests were performed 
at 60% and 75% thrust because of b roken lines and severe vibrations.  Limited performance information was 
obtained because of these issues.
2. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Naval Supersonic Laboratory Study (1961)91
The Office of Naval Research sponsored res earch in the Naval Supersonic Laboratory (NSL) at Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) for throttling by gas injection into the nozzle throat.  A symmetric secondary flow 
was injected into the nozzle throat to alter the nozzle flow.  The total flow ratio – or the ratio of primary flow 
injected into the chamber plus the secondary flow to the primary flow with no secondary flow – was unity, which 
indicated that the exhaust velocity did not change with injection rate and the flow behaved as though throt tling was 
accomplished by varying the throat area.  Three separate models were developed to analyze this throttling method.  
The models of Martin92 were the first analytical solutions to this flow throttling problem, but disagreed with the NSL 

[PDF PAGE 26]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
26
data.  In [ 91] an improvement to these models was made.  The two models based off of Martin’s work were the 
secondary mixing model and the sheet flow model.  A newer model, the secondary expansion model, was also 
developed.  Basic assumptions to the se models include one -dimensional flow, perfect gas, and isentropic flow.  
Two-dimensional and three -dimensional airflow investigations validated aspects of all three models.  Schlieren 
photographs showed that all three types of flow occurred.  
In addition to these three models, a flow analogy was developed and other pertinent variables investigated.  The 
analogy treated the secondary flow as a blunt body and then combined the two flows with matching boundary 
conditions.  Three variables investigated were temperature, secondary injection gas type, and combustion.  There 
was a significant effect as the secondary fluid stagnation temperature was reduced lower than the primary flow 
stagnation temperature.  Throttling was ineffective for a secondary stagnation temperature 5 times less than the 
primary stagnation temperature.  This effect was also evident in Rocketdyne testing on the F1 engine and 
additionally in United Aircraft Corporation (UAC) thrust vectoring experiments. 93  Rocketdyne showed that a 
stagnation temperature ratio of 4 did not throttle the primary flow.  UAC showed that the effectiveness varied with 
the square root of the secondary-to-primary stagnation temperature ratio.  The high temperature of the secondary 
working fluid seems to limit the practicality of throat throttling with gas injection.  
The type of injection gas also had an effect on throttling behavior.  A low specific heat ratio and low molecular 
rate were desirable properties of the secondary gas because of the low molecular weight and low specific heat ratio 
of the combustion gas.  Helium showed the most potential as a throttling secondary gas because of its low molecular 
weight.
Other variables examined were injection angle, nozzle throat pr essure gradient, and secondary flow injection 
location.  Throttling increased with decreasing injection angle, the angle between the nozzle axis and the injection 
axis.  A reduction in the nozzle throat pressure gradient had a small effect on increasing fl ow throttling.  The 
location of the secondary flow injection needed to be at the throat because the influence is strongest there to create a 
choked primary flow.
3. Other Engines
A February 1946 Aerojet report (Report No. RTM -20) described the development of a 100 lb thrust 
nitromethane monopropellant variable thrust engine.  A stainless steel pintle was moved into the nozzle throat to 
vary the thrust 10 -to-1.  Performance was measured only at 65% and 100 % thrust.  A 1948 M.W. Kellogg report 
(Report No. SPD -156) described and presented a highly complex injector design that showed the throat throttling 
methodology.  The throat was throttled by a pintle and the injector.  The injector contained movable concentric 
injector rings.  A 1950 University of Michigan r eport (Report UMN -71) discussed variable thrust engines using 
throat throttling, and concluded the method to be not feasible because of low pressure drops at low thrust.  The 
report also stated that combustion instability would be likely with the RFNA and aniline propellants in an engine 
with a 100 inch L*.  The variable L* was not taken into account.  An analytic study of variable thrust LREs was 
performed by the Army Ballistic Missile Agency on the Redstone Arsenal in Alabama in 1961. 94  The analysis 
compared the relative efficiencies between a variable throat area nozzle and a fixed nozzle geometry for storable 
propellants.  The report concluded there would be a 10% weight savings of propellant due to the performance 
increase gained with the variable throat area nozzle, which was insignificant to the overall vehicle weight.  The 
underlying assumptions of the configurations and model were not provided. 
G. Variable Area Injector
The variable area injector is often referred to as a pintle injector because the majority of v ariable area injectors 
contain a single central pintle feature that is moved to vary the injector orifice area.  The maximum thrust occurs 
when the injection orifices are fully open.  As the injection area is reduced using movable injector components, the 
chamber pressure and thrust are reduced.  Pressure drop increases as the engine throttles down because of the 
decreasing injection area, which results in high injection velocities and good atomization and high combustion 
efficiency over a wide throttle ran ge.  The most familiar variable area injector throttleable engine is certainly the 
Apollo Lunar Module Descent Engine (LMDE).  
The major advantages to this method are its design simplicity, but with some complexity of the actuating and 
guiding elements.  Design requirements are sometimes conflicting, such as different injector pressure drops to obtain
throttling chug stability and maximum combustion efficiency.  An optimization based on mission requirements 
provides the tradeoff between performance and thr ottling capability.  Generally there is a need for flow control 
valves in conjunction with variable area injection for complete mixture ratio and throttling control.  Performance 
efficiency may not be as high as it would be in a multi-element injector.

[PDF PAGE 27]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
27
1. Variable Thrust Engine Development Program (1950)95
Reaction Motors, Inc. examined variable thrust pressure-fed engine designs based on injectors previously tested 
under the U. S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics (BuAer) and the U . S. Air Force.  Four injector concepts were 
examined that represented methods to control the relationships of propellant flow rates, injector pressure drops, and 
chamber pressure.  The first injector concept used a single controllable valve that changed t he injector annulus area 
of one propellant.  The second injector concept used a single controllable valve for both injector holes.  Atomization 
was promoted by having radially injected propellants impinge on a splash plate.  The third injector included val ve 
control of the axial movement of a flow selector piston that covered or uncovered small holes permitting selection of 
specified flow.  The propellant streams impinged on a splash plate prior to injection into the chamber.  The fourth 
injector concept consisted of two poppet valves.  The variation of propellant inlet pressure gave a wide flow range 
for a prespecified smaller range of injector pressure drop, which was accomplished by balancing the pressure drop 
with poppet spring forces.  
2. Project MX-794 (1951)96
As follow-on to the propellant throttling study described in a previous section, two additional progress reports 
were published by the Willow Run Research Center at the University of Michigan. The second and third progress 
reports evaluated the variable area throttling methodology.  
In the second progress report, an injector was converted into a throttling injector by using a plunger whose 
movement simultaneously covered or uncovered both propellant ports, thus keeping the mixture ratio constant and 
the propellant flow rates controlled from a constant supply pressure.  Multiple swirl injectors with various size 
propellant orifices were tested to obtain performance information for a particular injector design configuration.  The 
best performing injector was converted into a variable area injector.  Continuous throttling was achieved over a 
range of 27-to-1.  With a constant supply pressure, the pressure drop increased as the engine throttled down, which 
minimized rough burning at low chamber pressures.  The throttleable injector showed lower performance than single 
thrust injectors tested with various size injection orifices, and the condition worsened as propellant flow decreased.  
This result was attributed to the result of improper mixing due to the changing of the prope llant entry angle.  
Covering of orifices by the plunger altered the entry angle of the flow so that less mixing was obtained.
In the third progress report, different size injectors, different types of injectors, and different propellants were 
tested.  The same remotely controlled plunger was used to cover and uncover the propellant orifices.  Continuous 
throttling was achieved over a 35 -to-1 range for the lower thrust engines and 6 -to-1 for the larger thrust engines.  
Triangular orifices maintained a consta nt geometric shape, as the plunger covered or uncovered the holes, which 
provided better flow control at low flow rates, although the holes were difficult to fabricate.  The other injectors had 
circular or rectangular orifices.
High frequency combustion instability was encountered at higher chamber pressures with the low thrust WFNA 
and jet fuel propellant combination.  The instability was eliminated by increasing the chamber contraction ratio from 
8-to-1 to 16-to1.  The chamber diameter was increased and the chamber length was decreased with a net increase in 
L*.
For the mid -range thrust development tests, the propellant supply pressure was constant, which allowed the 
pressure drop to increase with decreasing chamber pressure, and the mixing and spray formation to improve at lower 
propellant rates.  No combustion instabilities were experienced even after reducing the pressure drop by lowering 
the propellant tank pressures.  In one case the plunger seized, which was corrected with an o -ring seal between the 
plunger and the injector body.
3. NACA Study (1955)97
An investigation to examine the performance and operating characteristics of two variable area injectors over a 
wide thrust range was conducted by Tomazic in 1955.  The first injector was a triplet impinging-jet injector with six 
groups of 10 triplet sets; each group was controlled by a pneumatic valve actuator, which varied the number of 
triplet sets that were open.  The second injector was a swirl-cup injector where two fuel entry holes and two oxidizer 
entry holes injected the propellants in a swirl pattern into a cup.  The orifices were arranged alternately 90 degrees 
apart.  A movable piston formed the bottom of the cup and was moved by a pneumatic valve actuator.  The piston 
moved over the entry holes to change the area.  Schematics of the two injectors are shown in Figs. 22 and 23.

[PDF PAGE 28]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
28
Figure 22. Triplet Impinging-Jet Variable Area 
Injector
 Figure 23. Swirl-Cup Variable Area Injector
The triplet impinging-jet injector was tested over a thrust range of 12 -to-1 and the swirl cup injector was tested 
over a thrust range of 18.5-to-1. The triplet injector had 96% efficiency at full thrust, which steadily decreased until 
20% thrust where it decreased sharply.  The swirl cup injector had 90% efficiency at full thrust which also decreased 
sharply below 20%.  Figure 24 compares combustion efficiency for the two injectors. 
Figure 24.  Theoretical Specific Impulse for Triplet Impinging-Jet Variable Area Injector
One difficulty in this setup was leakage around the pistons, which degraded the spray pattern and altered the 
mixture ratio.  The performance drop in the triplet injectors was attributed to this leakage and poor mix ture ratio 
control.  The performance drop in the swirl -cup injector was attributed to poor mixing at low thrusts as was 
demonstrated in water flow tests.
4. Lunar Module Descent Engine Program (1963)19, 76, 98-101
The most well k nown throttleable engine in the United States is certainly the Lunar Module Descent Engine 
(LMDE).  Engine development began in 1963 and man-rated qualification was completed in 1967.  The engine was 
first used on Apollo 5 in an unmanned configuration in J anuary 1968, and then on Apollo 9 for a manned flight in 
March 1969.  On Apollo 11, the engine landed astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the surface of the 
moon.  The engine was also used to return the astronauts of Apollo 13 to an earth orbit fr om a lunar orbit after an 
oxygen tank failure damaged the service module.
The operating requirements of the LMDE included a 10 -to-1 throttling capability.  The nominal LMDE duty 
cycle included a 33-second orbit injection burn, an hour on-orbit coast, and a 784-second descent burn, as shown in 
Fig. 25.  Both engine burns started to 10% while the vehicle was stabilized.  The descent firing included a full thrust 

[PDF PAGE 29]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
29
braking phase and a 60% thrust braking phase, followed by a slow reduction to 40% thrust during ve hicle flare-out, 
and reduction to near 25% during the hovering phase.  
Figure 25.  LMDE Nominal Duty Cycle
The engine schematic is illustrated in Fig. 26.  Fuel cooled the injector faceplate and flowed into the combustion 
chamber out of the annular orifice of the pintle injector element.  The annular orifice was created by an extension of 
the injector face and a moveable sleeve.  A small portion of the fuel was injected along the side of the chamber wall 
through thirty-six tubes.  The oxidizer flowed t hrough the center of the pintle and was injected radially near the tip 
through thirty-six holes.  Movement of the fuel sleeve varied the injection area of both the fuel and oxidizer.
Figure 26.  LMDE Engine Layout 
Three fundamental requirements for the descent engine system were 1) accurate mixture ratio control over the 
entire thrust range, 2) controlled injection for performance and combustion stability over the entire thrust range, and 
3) simplicity of moving parts.  Two solutions were employed to solve these requirements.  First, the propellant flow 
control was separated from the propellant injection functions, which allowed optimization of each without one 
compromising the other.  Second, an injector with a centrally located single element pintle co ntained a single 
moving part to vary both the oxidizer and fuel orifice areas.  This solution provided the greatest design simplicity.
One disadvantage with variable area injectors is the inability to control mixture ratio, since as the injector orifice 
area changes, the mixture ratio can change as well.  The method used to control the mixture ratio in LMDE was to 
incorporate variable area cavitating venturis in the propellant lines in addition to the variable area injection orifices, 
which ensured that the propellant flow rates would be insensitive to variations in downstream pressures that resulted 
from injector orifice area changes.  Provided the manifold pressure stayed below the pressure required for cavitating 
flow, the flow rate would remain constant.   The cavitation regime was active only below 70% thrust; otherwise the 
propellant flow was controlled by the pressure drop of the entire system, which eliminated the large pressure loss 
penalties associated with high cavitating flows.
Combustion instabili ty was addressed by positioning the single element injector in a region that minimized 
coupling with tangential acoustic modes of the chamber.  A centrally located injector element would be most stable 
for a tangential acoustic mode, which has a pressure n ode line through the center of the chamber and is most 
resistant to a driving combustion forcing function at this location.  On the other hand, a centralized element injector 
would be susceptible to a radial acoustic mode, which has an antinode in the cent er of the chamber.  However, 

[PDF PAGE 30]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
30
neither radial nor tangential modes were detected from over 2800 tests including 31 bomb tests.  The reason the first 
radial mode was not excited may have been due to the reaction zone being annular rather than concentrated exa ctly 
in the center of the chamber.   Low frequency pressure oscillations were present during throttling transition with 20 
psi peak-to-peak in the 10 to 100 psi chamber pressure range.
Performance remained relatively high over the throttling range, as shownin Fig. 27.     
Figure 27.  LMDE Engine Specific Impulse Prior to Throat Erosion
5. TRW Inc. Studies - MIRA 150A (1965)102-105
The MIRA 150A variable thrust rocket engine was designed for attitude control on the Surveyor spacecraft.  The 
engine was ablatively cooled because of the incompatibility of available coolant flow over the entire 5 -to-1 thrust 
range.  The injector was a single element coaxial tube pintle.  A single moving sleeve provided variable area control 
to the annular propellant orifices.  Propellant flows were also controlled by variable area cavitating venturis 
upstream of the injector orifices.  The NASA MSFC later selected MIRA 150A as one of two engines to be 
evaluated for a lunar exploration fly ing system.  The injection velocities were re -optimized for a new propellant 
combination.  A total of 84 starts with 4 engine configurations demonstrated deep throttling (6.8 -to-1), chamber 
durability, ballistic performance, and dynamic response.
6. Gaseous Propellant Throttling Rocket Engine Study (1965)106-110
Several gas injection rocket engine experiments were performed at a rocket engine test facility at the Air Force 
Institute of Technology (AFIT) located on Wrig ht-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.   Although this study does not 
use LREs, the features of this mode of throttling are very similar.  The variable area injector throttling method was 
selected since it was most suitable for the design requirements and was compatible with the test facility at AFIT.  A 
small engine was designed for 10 -to-1 throttling based on a constant thrust engine design by Ow. 110  The modified 
throttleable engine incorporated a new injector plate and 3 movable pintles.  Movement of the central pintle 
regulated the oxidizer flow while movement of the other two pintles regulated the fuel flow.  Ethylene propylene 
rubber seals were used between the movable pintles and the injector front cover plate.  The engine assembly 
schematic is shown in Fig. 28.  Fuel was injected radially through the side walls of the entire chamber and acted also 
as film coolant.  The two fuel variable area orifices were located upstream of the film coolant manifold.  The self 
impinging oxidizer was injected through a central orifice that was controlled by the central pintle.  
The injector was later redesigned to a twin orifice showerhead injector which solved facility issues.  There was 
one orifice in the chamber for fuel an d one orifice for oxidizer on the opposite side.  Two plates slid over each 
propellant orifice to define the basic throttling mechanism.  The engine was throttled 4.1 -to-1, and no combustion 
instabilities were observed.  Combustion efficiency increased at lower thrust levels.  
Another modified variable thrust rocket engine incorporated a variable area injector using gaseous propellants.  
The propellant lines included separate orifices, one for each propellant, and again plates slid over each propellant 
orifice.  The impinging injector face contained one central hole for the oxidizer and ten surrounding holes for the 
fuel, angled so that impingement occurred roughly two inches from the injector face.  Throttling over 7 -to-1 was 
achieved.  Steady state set -point tests demonstrated the overall performance to remain nearly constant, with a very 
slight drop-off of specific impulse.  The c* performance was highest at the low throttle conditions and was attributed 
to the longer gas molecule chamber residence time. There was no indication of combustion instabilities. 

[PDF PAGE 31]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
31
A hydraulic control system was later implemented that actuated the throttling mechanism and examined the 
engine response to transient throttling over a thrust range of 5 -to-1.  Impulse throttling showe d that the decreasing 
percent throttle tests required more time than increasing percent throttle tests to return to steady state performance 
values.  This was attributed to flow pressures in the manifold and resulting friction forces.  There was no indicat ion 
of combustion instabilities.
Figure 28. Gaseous Propellant Variable Area Injector Engine Schematic
7. Deep Throttling TR202 (2005)111-113
Northrop Grumman Space Technology (NGST) is developing the TR202 engine, a closed expander cycle engine 
with independent turbopumps and a variable area pintle injector, for technology development of a cryogenic 
propellant applicable to the lunar descent engine.  The independent turbomachinery and variable area pintle would 
enable full control over mixture ratio and thrust.  Injector tests have been performed at NASA Marshall Space Flight 
Center.  Stable combustion performance was demonstrated with a pintle injector at several setpoints over a 10 -to-1 
throttling range with LO2 and GH2 propellants.
  The pintle injector would control the core and wall mixture ratios and maintain acceptable injection propellant 
pressure drops, which should provide high combustion efficiency and combustion stability over the entire throttling 
range.  An illustration of the pintle concept is shown in Fig. 29.  NGST lists several technology challenges, most 
relating to behavior during deep throttling, including acceptable injector performance, continuous and deep 
throttling with cryogenic propellants, stable combustion, acceptable cooling, balancing injector stiffness with pump 
performance and pump exit pressures during throttling, maintaining mixture ratio at desired levels, avoiding pump 
stall at low flow conditions, and developing deep throttling turbopump technology.  Most of these issues are general 
concerns for any deep throttling technology.
Figure 29. Pintle Injector Operation Illustration

[PDF PAGE 32]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
32
The injector would be developed to a 10 -to-1 throttling range and the data used to update the engine de sign 
based on program throttling needs.  As the engine throttles, the fuel stiffness will increase because the density is a 
strong function of temperature.  The oxidizer stiffness will also increase because the variable area injector orifices 
are sized for a specific pressure drop.  The stiffness would range from 20% at full thrust to 106% at minimum thrust.  
This has no effect on the cycle balance because there is more power margin at lower throttle settings.  The ability to 
control mixture ratio over the throttling range provides the ability to maximize propellant utilization, and the ability 
to control stiffness eliminates the possibility of chug or high oxidizer pump exit pressures at high thrust.
H. Hydrodynamically Dissipative Injector
Hydrodynamically dissipative injectors use fluid dynamic methods to create adequate impedance across the 
injector.  Methods to do this include use of capillary tubes which create a high pressure drop by means of viscous 
losses, or long element features to create added fluid mass or inertance as additional impedance.  The most common 
method, and widely used in Russia, 114 is to use swirling vortex tubes to effectively alter the discharge coefficient 
over a throttling range in combination with propellant throttling. 4, 115, 116   A dua l-manifold approach is used in 
combination with this technique.  These methods ensure that the injector is free of moving parts, however in some 
cases additional valving is necessary.  Hydrodynamically dissipative injector methods are usually subsets of other 
methodologies such as high-pressure-drop injectors or dual-manifold injectors.
  
1. Demonstration of Throttleable LOX/GH2 Injector Concepts (2001)117, 118
A swirl injector with a two -channel liquid oxidizer system was designed and successfully tested at the 
Pennsylvania State University with expert advising from visiting professor Vladimir Bazarov.  The tangential -entry 
dual-inlet swirl injector is a common Russian design and is sometimes categorized in this section.  It is effectively a 
dual-manifold injector design and throttling is performed by independently controlling flow through the two 
channels.  Throttling behavior is quantified not only by mass flow variation, but also by variations in injector 
discharge c oefficient.  A vortex tube is formed inside the injector element by considering element design and 
managing pre-injection swirl flow.  The theory shows how controlling the hydraulics inside the injector element 
influences the discharge coefficient.  Single throttle point experiments were conducted over a 10-to-1 throttle range, 
and continuously throttling experiments were conducted by continuously varying propellant flow rates over a wide 
operating range during a single run.  
Chug (45 Hz with harmonics) was observed at the lowest chamber pressure while the dual -element injector was 
in single-channel operating mode.  This instability, attributed to very long (33 ft) feedlines and inadequate pressure 
drops, degraded performance at this operating point.  The c hug oscillation also appeared occasionally during 
transient runs and also occurred at the transition between two -channel operation and single -channel operation, but 
that could have been attributed to the closure of the LOX valve.
Performance efficiencies w ere reduced during chug instabilities but also at high throttling conditions.  The 
performance degradation at high throttling was shown possibly due to poor mixing caused from a fuel -oxidizer 
momentum imbalance.  Much better performance was obtained when t he straight shearing gaseous fuel injection 
plate was replaced with the swirling injector plate giving an adequately sized swirl jet. 
I. Combined Methods
Some throttling methods inherently combine techniques to utilize advantages from each particular method and 
provide even deeper throttling, such as variable area injectors or hydrodynamically dissipative injectors.  Variable 
area injectors commonly use valves in the propellant lines for additional flow control.  Hydrodynamically 
dissipative injectors combine propellant throttling, dual -manifold injectors, and variable discharge coefficients.  
Dual-manifold throttling requires propellant throttling.  Pulse modulation by Bell Aerospace combines high -
pressure-drop injectors for 12-to-1 throttling and pulsing methods to increase throttling to 100-to-1.  Generally most 
methods require propellant throttling to some extent.  Other throttling technology combinations are also possible.
1. Advanced Throttling Concepts Study (1964)43, 73
A combination constant area injector and variable area injector, as contradictory as it sounds, was investigated in 
the Advanced Throttling Concept Study by Pratt & Whitney Aircraft in 1964. The intent of this study was to 
evaluate injector systems that provide high combustion performance during deep throttling (specified down to 50-to-
1).  The injector called the BIProportional Area Spring (BIPAS) was operated in two distinct modes.  At low thrust 
levels it acted as a variable area injector to maintain a constant pressure drop, and at high thrust levels it had t he 
characteristics of a constant area injector with variable pressure drop.  This allowed for a reasonable injector 

[PDF PAGE 33]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
33
pressure drop over a wide thrust range while providing enough stiffness at high thrust to prevent low frequency 
instabilities.  Spring rate of the poppet valves and the location of a physical stop restricting the poppet valves could 
be changed based on the stability characteristics of the engine.  This injector design was not selected for 
demonstration testing although it appeared superior to the variable area injector.
III. Summary and Conclusions
LREs are generally designed for fixed thrust operation with small variations about the design point for throttling.  
However, there are many applications where variable thrust is required, including planetary entry and descent, space 
rendezvous, orbital maneuvering including orientation and stabilization in space, and hovering and hazard avoidance 
during planetary landing.  This paper reviewed the methods identified since the pioneering work for throttlingLREs.  
The following paragraphs briefly summarize the important characteristics of each method.
1. Summary – High-Pressure-Drop Injectors
Project Thumper, one of the first extensive deep throttling investigations, touched on many of the issues related to 
throttling with a fixed-geometry injector.  Performance was reduced at low power levels due to poor combustion at 
low chamber pressures, mainly because there was insufficient injector pressure drop to sustain good atomization and 
mixing of the propellants.  Instabilities were discovered at lower chamber pressures including whistling (high 
frequency combustion instability), motorboating (chug), and hydraulic instability.  The instabilities increased the 
heat transfer rates several times greater than expected w ithout instability.  Studies showed that the fuel in a 
regeneratively cooled chamber would vaporize at low pressures, and in general, cooling ability was decreased at 
lower thrusts.
Similar characteristics were observed in other fixed -geometry injectors from other programs , including the 
sequence of instabilities as chamber pressure was reduced and the increase in heat transfer during instability.  High-
pressure-drop injectors have performed better than low-pressure-drop injectors in terms of stability and performance
during throttling.  Several other solutions were proposed to improve stability, including reducing the injector area if 
pump head rise was available, providing heat transfer to increase the amount of vapor in the manifold s and thus 
increasing resistance, and providing gas injection into the liquid manifold s having the same increasing resistance 
effect.  Low frequency system instabilities occurred when coolant flow vaporized inside the coolant jacket.
Rapid transients over the throttling range we re also investigated.  In a pump -fed system, throttling from high 
thrust to low thrust could stall the fuel pump.  Other pump -related concerns during throttling included rotordynamic 
stability, running at shaft critical speeds, high pressure fuel turbopump thrust bearing lift off, hydrostatic bearing of 
the high pressure oxidizer turbopump running in the stall region, freezing turbine gas, sustaining a satisfactory axial 
thrust balance, bi-stability of the high pressure oxidizer turbopump boost pump, and performance of the turbopumps 
at low flow-to-speed ratios.  Nozzle sideloads during the start and shutdown from low thrust were also concerns.
2. Summary – Dual-Manifold Injector
There are several common themes that occur in dual -manifold injector systems.  In general, higher performance 
efficiency can be achieved at low thrust levels because the injector can be designed with high injection velocities at 
low thrust so performance is acceptable, and high injector resistance so stability is acceptable.  Typically the 
oxidizer side or liquid side contains the dual manifold because that circuit is generally the driving mechanism for
combustion instability.  Complexity is increased over high-pressure-drop injectors because of the additional control 
valves.
There are combustion stability and operational concerns at the transition point.  Instability at the transition point 
has occurred as well as at low thrust where only one manifold operates.  In one case, chug was attributed to liquid 
flowing into the secondary manifold and compressing the trapped gas inside.  The chug was eliminated by bleeding 
the secondary manifold to remove the gas.  In another case, instability was incited by two -phase flow entering the 
secondary injector orifices and becoming trapped after the s econdary injector control valve was closed, and again 
was eliminated by releasing the trapped injector purge gases in the secondary manifold.  The selection of the 
transition point is a compromise to obtain adequate injector velocity from the secondary injector for good propellant 
mixing and conformance to limiting system pressures as well as providing adequate stability margin.  Complete 
closure of the secondary manifold can cause overheating of the secondary manifold, depletion of propellant from the 
secondary manifolds, and contamination of the unprimed secondary manifold with combustion products.  Low thrust 
over a long period of time can deplete the secondary manifold propellant and cause a significant time delay and 
lower thrust for diversion of primary flow to re-prime the secondary manifold.

[PDF PAGE 34]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
34
Other design challenges include the transient system response when flowing from low thrust to high thrust 
because of the necessity to prime the secondary manifold.  The proposed method to obtain a fast response during the 
transition is to continuously flow fluid through the secondary manifold either by a bleed flow through the secondary 
valve or a bleed flow from the primary fluid flow.  Injector volume is typically minimized to generally ensure 
adequate flow response during throttling.
Stability and performance can be optimized by optimizing the flow splits between the primary and secondary 
manifold.  In one example the secondary injector flow was not pumped evenly from the injector causing an uneven 
mixture ratio distribution in the chamber.  
The throttling heat transfer results indicate that the existence of a transitional and/or a laminar boundary layer in 
the nozzle region may be encountered at some point over the throttling range.  This transition would likely occur if 
the ejector system could not replicate vacuum conditions adequately. The total chamber heat load fits over the entire 
throttling range generally with the classical heat transfer correlation of pc
0.8.
3. Summary – Gas Injection
The primary advantage of the gas injection method for large thrust engines is to maintain a high injector pressure 
drop over a wide throttling range by a lowering of the propellant bulk density.  This method has been shown to 
eliminate instabilities by increasing injector resistance, and is generally only necessary when operating at low thrust.  
For very small thrust engines the additional flow can increase thrust.  Additionally, performance is not reduced 
during throttling, and in fact may increase, due to the increased pressu re drop as well as increased mixing from an 
aerated propellant.  In most cases, however, the added weight and complexity for gas injection hardware including 
valving, piping and control systems will reduce the payload gain from any performance increase.  As a minimum the 
gas should be tapped off another system such as the tank pressurant.  The gas injection flow rate can be optimized 
for both performance and stability but the flow rates required are generally less than 1% of the propellant flow.  
The gas injection device must be designed so that smooth homogeneous gas injection occurs.  In one water flow 
test, feed system instability was created by the surging gas into the injector manifold.  Another concern expressed 
was maldistribution or nonuniformity of the aerated propellant, which could cause mixture ratio variations and local 
hot and cold regions in the combustion chamber.  And lastly, one interesting technique used combustion in the 
propellant lines to lower the density produced stable and repeatable results, but ha d obvious concerns of trying to 
control reaction rates in the propellant lines.
4. Summary – Multiple Chambers
The primary advantage of throttling with multiple chambers is that a deeper throttling can be achieved by 
controlling the thrust of each chamber independently.  Multiple chambers are commonly used in Russia for reasons 
not specific to throttling, primarily for combustion stability and manufacturing advantages.  The obvious 
disadvantages include the feed system complexity and less than optimum weight.  Aerospike engines can take 
advantage of using multiple chambers.  Multiple small chambers make up banks that can be independently throttled 
in the aerospike engine.
5. Summary – Pulse Modulation
The objective of pulse modulation is to obtai n a thrust profile by utilizing pulses of various thrust levels and 
durations.  Two typical modes of operation include obtaining a thrust profile by using pulse modulation of a constant 
width but varying the thrust level, and obtaining a thrust profile by pulse modulation of a constant thrust for each 
pulse but with varying pulse width.  A fast response valve is essential to providing pulses of propellants into the 
combustion chamber.  A small manifold provides maximum pulse response and pulse performance. 
The performance from a pulsed thrust operating point is usually lower than that of an unpulsed or continuous 
operating point due to the effect of including the transient as a significant portion of the duration in the overall 
impulse.  The poorer mixing and atomization during the transients lower the average performance of the pulse. 
Disadvantages also include shock loading on the vehicle, heat soak in the chamber head end, inefficient use of 
propellant due to chamber cooling channel and injector dribble volume losses between pulses.  Ignition of each 
pulse can be a concern depending on the pulse rate.
Having the ability to pulse can provide extreme throttling capability.  Combining pulsing with continuous 
operation has provided throttling to 1% of maximum thrust, but due to performance degradation while in pulse 
mode, most of the time in the mission should occur at high thrustduring continuous operation. 

[PDF PAGE 35]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
35
6. Summary – Throat Throttling
The throat throttling method is unique in that it provides the highest p erformance and chamber pressure at low 
thrust.  However there are many disadvantages with this method, including cooling the throat pintle and preventing 
excessive vibrations of the pintle.  An uncooled throat pintle was historically not an option because of material 
limitations, but there are higher temperature materials or thermal coatings available now.  The pintle could also be 
regeneratively cooled. 
Performance losses were attributed to gas separation in the nozzle cone because of the location of the pintle, 
which was verified visually with exhaust gas directed at steeper angles during throttling.  An optimized pintle device 
shape would be important to obtain maximum performance.  The effect of pintle design on nozzle coefficient should 
be investigated to obtain the best performance during throttling.  Additionally, for a constant pressure propellant 
system, it would be impossible to obtain optimized atomization and mixing with this method because there is not an 
adequate pressure drop across the injector over the full range.  A compromise must be made in chamber size because 
there are large variations in L* due to the varying throat area.  At low thrust, the L* is much higher and allows for 
more complete combustion which improves efficiency.  Combustion instabilities are a concern at low thrust even 
with the high chamber pressure because the injector pressure drop is small at low thrust.  A high rate of thrust 
change can be designed by incorporating a good hydraulic system for the pintle device.  
Finally, throat throttling by means of gas injection into the nozzle throat does not immediately seem practical.  
The major drawback is the required high temperature needed for the injected gas.  In the ideal configuration, the 
secondary gas injected would have a low specific heat ratio, a low molecular weight, and a high temperature, and be 
injected at the throat.
7. Summary – Variable Area Injection
The variable area injector methodology is the most familiar throttling method because of the legacy of the 
LMDE.  The major advantages of variable area injectors are the relative simplicity and the few incidences of high 
frequency combustion instability.  The resistance to high frequency combustion instabilities probably occurs 
because the location of energy release from the center -mounted pintle injector minimizes coupling with the 
tangential and first radial acoustic modes.
Disadvantages include the requirement for a propellant control system and heat transfer to a pintle injector 
element.  Major concerns in early experiments included optimization of flow control and injector design, integration 
of the variable area injector with the thrust control system, leakage around the pintle injector, and maintaining a 
specific mixture ratio for a particular thrust.  Most of the problems were rectified by incorporating flow control 
valves in the propellant lines.  In this way, both an appropriate injection pressure drop and a controlled mixture ratio 
were possible.  Performance efficiency may not be as high as with a multi-element injector.
8. Summary – Hydrodynamically Dissipative Injector
The hydrodynamically dissipative injector uses fluid dynamics to improve the impedance across the injector.  
Swirling vortex tubes are the most common method and enables deep throttling by altering the discharge coefficient.  
The major advantage of this method is that the system remains simple because there are no moving parts in the 
injector.  Although there is limited work in this area, an analytical framework allows the design of a two -channel 
hydrodynamically dissipative injector, more specifically, a tangential -entry dual -inlet swirl injector.  Throttling 
behavior is quantified not only by mass flow variation, but also by variations in injector discharge coefficient.  A 
vortex tube is formed i nside an injector element by considering element design and managing pre -injection swirl 
flow.  The theory shows how controlling the hydraulics inside the injector element influences the discharge 
coefficient.
Acknowledgments
The authors greatly acknowledge the assistance of Dianne Moore and the librarians from the Redstone Scientific 
Information Center (RSIC) and also Amy High from the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) academic library.
References
    1"The Vision for Space Exploration," NASA, NASA NP-2004-01-334-HQ, Washington, DC.
    2"NASA Authorization Act of 2005," Senate and House of Representatives, Washington, DC, 16 Dec. 2005.
    3Sutton, G. P., History of Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines, AIAA, Reston, VA, 2006.

[PDF PAGE 36]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
36
    4Bazarov, V. G., "Throttleable Liquid Propellant Engines Swirl Injectors for Deep Smooth Thrust Variations," 30th 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, AIAA Paper 94-2978, 1994.
    5Sutton, G. P., Rocket Propulsion Elements An Introduction to the Engineering of Rockets, 5th ed., John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, NY, 1986.
    6Huzel, D. K. and Huang, D. H., Seebass, A. R. (ed.) Modern Engineering for Design of Liquid -Propellant Rocket Engines, 
Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 147, AIAA, Washington, DC, 1992.
    7Welton, D. E., Bensky, S. M., and Hiland, J. R., "Toward the Variable -Thrust Liquid -Rocket Engine," Astronautics and 
Aerospace Engineering, Vol. 1, No. 11, 1963, pp. 77.
    8Welton, D. E., Bensky, M. S., and Hiland, J., "Variable -Thrust Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines," AIAA Summer Meeting, 
AIAA Paper 63-268, 1963.
    9Sutton, G. P., "History of Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines in the United States," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 19, 
No. 6, 2003, pp. 978-1007.
    10Dornberger, W., V-2, The Viking Press, Inc., New York, 1954.
    11Perry, R. L., "The Antecedents of the X-1," AIAA Second Annual Meeting, AIAA Paper 65-453, 1965.
    12Walter, H., "Report on Rocket Power Plants based on T-Substance," NACA, NACA TM 1170, Washington, DC.
    13Rusek, J. J., "New Decomposition Catalysts and Characterization Techniques for Rocket -Grade Hydrogen Peroxide," 
Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 12, No. 3, 1996, pp. 574-579.
    14Andrews, D., "Advantages of Hydrogen Peroxide as a R ocket Oxidant," Journal of the British Interplanetary Society , Vol. 
43, 1990, pp. 319-328.
    15Walter, H., "Experience with the Application of Hydrogen Peroxide for Production of Power," Jet Propulsion, 1954, pp. 166-
171.
    16Clark, J. D., Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants , Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 
1972.
    17Smith, J. R., Kay, A. L., and Creek, E. J., German Aircraft of the Second World War, Putman & Company Limited, London, 
1972.
    18Myhra, D., Secret Aircraft Designs of the Third Reich, Schiffer Publishing Ltd., Atglen, PA, 1998.
    19Dressler, G. A., "Summary of Deep Throttling Rocket Engines with Emphasis on Apollo LMDE," 42nd 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, AIAA Paper 2006-5220, 2006.
    20Rutkowski, E. V., "Variable-Thrust Rocket Engines," Astronautics, Vol. 4, No. 10, 1959, pp. 40.
    21Amneus, J. S., "First Progress Report on Rocket Motor Throttling," Willow Run Research Center Engineering Research 
Institute University of Michigan, UMM-71, Dec. 1950.
    22Harrje, D. T. and Reardon, F. H., "Liquid Propellant Rocket Combustion Instability," NASA, NASA SP -194, Washington, 
DC, 1972.
    23Gill, G. S. and Nurick, W. H., "Liquid Rocket Engine Injectors," NASA, NASA SP-8089, Washington, DC, Mar. 1976.
    24Zweig, F., Tuteur, F. B., Cunningham, W. J., and Bower, J. L., "The Dynamics of Throttling Hydraulic Systems," Yale 
University, Report 8252-R, New Haven, CT, Jun. 1950.
    25Merritt, F. and Dumont, L., "Supplemental Report - Wide Range Flow Control Program," Air Force, AFRPL -TR-69-141, 
Edwards Air Force Base, CA, May 1969.
    26Relyea, L. K., "Thumper Project: Rocket Motor Throttling Tests," General Electric Company, R49A0410, Schenectady, NY, 
10 Jun. 1949.
    27Papp, D. S. , "From Project Thumper to SDI - The Role of Ballistic Missile Defense in US Security Policy," Air & Space 
Power Journal, Vol. I, No. 3, 1987.
    28Wanhainen, J. P., Antl, R. J., Hannum, N. P., and Mansour, A. H., "Throttling Characteristics of a Hydrogen -Oxygen, 
Regeneratively Cooled, Pump-Fed Rocket Engine," NASA, NASA TM X-1043, Washington, DC, Dec. 1964.
    29"Advanced Injector Concepts Investigation Final Report," Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company: A Division of Aerojet General, 
Report 21052-3F, 30 Apr. 1971.
    30"Advanced Injector Concepts Investigation Final Summary Report," Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company: A Division of Aerojet 
General, Report 21052-3FS, 30 Apr. 1971.
    31Andrus, S. R., Bishop, H. L., Duckering, R. E., Gibb, J. A., Nelson, A. W., and Ransom, V. H., "Throttling and Scaling 
Study for Advanced Storable Engine: Part 1 of Two Parts," Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-68-2, Part 1, 
Sacramento, CA, Jan. 1968.
    32Andrus, S. R., Bishop, H. L., Gibb, J. A., and Nelson, A. W., "Throttling and Scaling Study for Advanced Storable Engine: 
Part 2 of Two Parts," Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-68-2, Part 2, Sacramento, CA, Jan. 1968.
    33Addoms, J. F., Jr., Cordova, R., and McGough, C. B., Method of Making Composit e Ultra -Thin Metal Platelet having 
Precisely Controlled Pattern of Flow Passages Therein, Patent No. 3,413,704, filed 26 Nov. 1965.
    34Wilcoxen, M. L., "RL10A -5: An Assessment of Reusability Demonstrated during the SSRT Program," 32nd 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, AIAA Paper 96-3110, 1996.
    35Rachuk, V. S., Shostak, A. V., Dmitrenko, A. I., Goncharov, G. I., Hernandez, R., Starle, R. G., and Hulka, J., "Benchmark 
Testing of an Enhanced Operability LO2/LH2 RD-0120 Engine," 32nd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, 
AIAA Paper 96-2609, 1996.
    36Bradley, M. A., "SSME Off -Nominal Low Power Level Operation," 33rd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion 
Conference and Exhibit, AIAA Paper 1997-2685, 1997.

[PDF PAGE 37]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
37
    37Anderson, B., Bradley , M. A., and Ives, J., "SSME Key Operations Demonstration," 33rd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint 
Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, AIAA Paper 1997-2686, 1997.
    38Giuliano, V. J., Leonard, T. G., Adamski, W. M., and Kim, T. S., "CECE: A Deep Throttling Demonst rator Cryogenic 
Engine for NASA's Lunar Lander," 43rd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, AIAA 2007-5480, 
2007.
    39Giuliano, V. J., Leonard, T. G., and Kim, T. S., "Development Status of the CECE Cryogenic Deep Throttling Demonstrator 
Engine," Space Propulsion 2008, 2nd International Symposium on Propulsion for Space Transportation, 2008.
    40Kenny, R. J., "Influence of Variable Thrust Parameters on Swirl Injector Fluid Mechanics," Doctor of Philosophy University 
of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL, 2008.
    41Conrad, W., Hannum, N. P., and Bloomer, H. E., "Photographic Study of Liquid -Oxygen Boiling and Gas Injection in the 
Injector of a Chugging Rocket Engine," NASA, NASA TM X-948, Washington, DC, Dec. 1964.
    42Lefebvre, A. H., Chigier, N. (ed.) Atomization and Sprays, Combustion: An International Series, Taylor & Francis, 1989.
    43Mitchell, J. P., "Technical Report No. 2 of Advanced Throttling Concepts Study," Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, Florida 
Research and Development Center, PWA FR-1045, West Palm Beach, FL, 25 Jul. 1964.
    44Mitchell, J. P., "Technical Report No. 3 of Advanced Throttling Concepts Study," Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, Florida 
Research and Development Center, PWA FR-1108, West Palm Beach, FL, 15 Sep. 1964.
    45Mitchell, J. P., "Technical Report No. 4 of Advanced Throttling Concepts Study," Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, Florida 
Research and Development Center, PWA FR-1231, West Palm Beach, FL, 15 Dec. 1964.
    46Zettle, E. V., Riebling, R. W., and Clapp, S. D., "Chamber Technology for Space -Storable Propellants," AIAA Joint 
Propulsion Specialists Conference, 1965.
    47Nagai, C. K., Bartlett, R. C., Knight, R. M., and Clapp, S. D., "Chamber Technology for the Space Storable OF 2 - MMH 
Propellant Combination," AIAA Second Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference, AIAA Paper 66-623, 1966.
    48"Final Report, Chamber Technology for Space Storable Propellants," NASA, NASA CR-110644, Canoga Park, Sep. 1969.
    49Burry, R. V. and Pauckert, R. P., "Engine System Des igns for Space Storable Propellants," AIAA 4th Propulsion Joint 
Specialist Conference, AIAA Paper 68-615, 1968.
    50Ingebo, R. D., "Drop -Size Distributions for Impinging -Jet Breakup in Airstreams Simulating the Velocity Conditions in 
Rocket Combustors," NACA, NACA TN 4222, Washington, Mar. 1958.
    51Rupe, J. H., "The Liquid -Phase Mixing of a Pair of Impinging Streams," Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of 
Technology, JPL-PR-20-195, 6 Aug. 1953.
    52Atherton, R. R., "Advanced Cryogenic Rocket Engine Program Staged Combustion Concept, Final Report, Vol I," AFRPL-
TR-67-298-VOL I, Dec. 1967.
    53Atherton, R. R., "Advanced Cryogenic Rocket Engine Program Staged Combustion Concept, Final Report, Vol II," AFRPL-
TR-67-298-VOL II, Dec. 1967.
   54Atherton, R. R., "Advanced Cryogenic Rocket Engine Program Staged Combustion Concept, Final Report, Vol III," AFRPL-
TR-67-298-VOL III, Dec. 1967.
    55Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129 -P-1 First Annual Report, Vol I," U. S. Air Force, 
AFRPL-TR-69-3-Vol I, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1969.
    56Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129 -P-1 First Annual Report, Vol II," U. S. Air Force, 
AFRPL-TR-69-3-Vol II, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1969.
    57Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129-P-1 First Annual Report, Vol III," U. S. Air Force, 
AFRPL-TR-69-3-Vol III, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1969.
    58Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129-P-1 Engine Performance," U. S. Air Force, AFRPL-
TR-69-19, Edwards, CA, Apr. 1969.
    59Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129 -P-1 Demonstrator Engine Design, Vol 1," U. S. Air 
Force, AFRPL-TR-70-6 Vol 1, Edwards, CA, Apr. 1970.
    60Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusab le Rocket Engine Program XLR129-P-1 Demonstrator Engine Design, Vol 3," U. S. Air 
Force, AFRPL-TR-70-6 Vol 3, Edwards, CA, Apr. 1970.
    61Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129 -P-1 Final Report, Vol I," U. S. Air Force, AFRPL -
TR-71-1-Vol I, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1971.
    62Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129-P-1 Final Report, Vol II," U. S. Air Force, AFRPL -
TR-71-1-Vol II, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1971.
    63Atherton, R. R., "Air Force Reusable Rocket Engine Program XLR129-P-1 Final Report, Vol III," U. S. Air Force, AFRPL-
TR-71-1-Vol III, Edwards, CA, Jan. 1971.
    64Hankins, R. A. and Yankovich, M., "Throttlable [ sic] Primary Injector for Staged Combustion Engine," U. S. Air Force, 
AFRL-TR-70-40, Edwards.
    65Masters, A., "Advanced Expander Test Bed Program," AIAA Space Programs and Technologies Conference , AIAA Paper 
90-3708, 1990.
    66Masters, A. I. and Mitchell, J. C., "Advanced Expander Test Bed Program: Final Annual Technical Progress Report," NASA, 
NASA CR 187082, West Palm Beach, FL, Apr. 1991.
    67Masters, A. I. and Mitchell, J. C., "Advanced Expander Test Bed Program: Preliminary Design Review Report," NASA, 
NASA CR 187081, West Palm Beach, FL, May 1991.

[PDF PAGE 38]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
38
    68Masters, A. I. and Tabata, W. K., "Design of an Advanced Expander Test Bed," AIAA/NASA/OAI Conference on Advanced 
SEI Technologies, AIAA Paper 91-3437, 1991.
    69Riccardi, D. P. and Mitchell, J. P., "Advanced Expander Test Bed Program: Second Annual Technical Progress Report," 
NASA, NASA CR 189130, West Palm Beach, FL, Mar. 1992.
    70Mitchell, J. C. and Tabata, W. K., "Design of an Advanced Expander Test Bed," AIAA/SAE/ASME/ASEE 29th Joint 
Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, AIAA Paper 93-2133, 1993.
    71Riccardi, D. P. and Mitchell, J. C., "Advanced Expander Test Bed Program: Annual Technical Progress Report for 1992," 
NASA, NASA CR 191049, Jan. 1993.
    72Morrell, G., "Rocket Thrust Variation with Foamed Liquid Propellants," NACA, NACA-RM-E56K27, Washington, DC, 26 
Feb. 1957.
    73Mitchell, J. P., "Final Report of Advanced Throttling Concepts Study," Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, Florida Research and 
Development Center, PWA FR-1279, West Palm Beach, FL, 19 Mar. 1965.
    74Rivard, J. G., "New Techniques for Throttleable Bipropellant Roc ket Engines," AIAA Joint Propulsion Specialists 
Conference, AIAA Paper No. 65-560, 1965.
    75"CPIA/M5 Liquid Propellant Engine Manual," CPIA, CPIA M5, Columbia, MD.
    76Hammock, W. R., Jr., Currie, E. C., and Fisher, A. E., "Apollo Experience Report - Descent Propulsion System," NASA, 
NASA TN D-7143, Washington, DC, Mar. 1973.
    77Ruddock, S. and McCrea, J., "Feasibility Study and Performance Modeling of a Throttleable Attitude Control Thruster," 
Bachelor of Engineering with Honors University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 1991.
    78Sutton, G. P., "History of Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines in Russia, Formerly Soviet Union," Journal of Propulsion and 
Power, Vol. 19, No. 6, 2003, pp. 1008-1037.
    79Diem, H. G., "Advanced Thrust Chamber for Sp ace Maneuvering Propulsion Third Quarterly Report," U. S. Air Force, 
AFRPL-TR-67-78, Edwards Air Force Base, CA, Mar. 1967.
    80Wiswell, R. L., "Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology Program (Second Quarterly Progress Report)," Air Force 
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-68-20, Canoga Park, CA, May 1968.
    81Wiswell, R. L., "Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology Program (Third Quarterly Progress Report)," Air Force 
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-68-154, Canoga Park, CA, Sep. 1968.
    82Wiswell, R. L., "Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology Program (Fourth Quarterly Progress Report)," Air Force 
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-68-221, Canoga Park, CA, Dec. 1968.
    83Wiswell, R. L., "Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Tech nology Program (Fifth Quarterly Progress Report)," Air Force 
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-69-47, Canoga Park, CA, Mar. 1969.
    84Wiswell, R. L., "Advanced Maneuvering Propulsion Technology Program (Seventh Quarterly Progress Report)," Air Force
Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, AFRPL-TR-69-189, Canoga Park, CA, Sep. 1969.
    85Gunston, B., World Encyclopedia of Aero Engines: from  the Pioneers to the Present Day, 1992.
    86Werrell, K. P., "The Evolution of the Cruise Missile," Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, AL, Sep. 1985.
    87Brunk, W. E. and Flaherty, R. J., "Methods and Velocity Requirements for the Rendezvous of Satellites in Circumplanetary 
Orbits," NASA, NASA TN D-81, Washington, DC, Oct. 1959.
    88Hord, R. A. and Durling, B. J., "Analysis of a Linear System for Variable -Thrust Control in the Terminal Phase of 
Rendezvous," NASA, NASA TN D-953, Washington, DC, Sep. 1961.
    89Carey, L., "Dual-Mode, 100:1 Thrust Modulation Rocket Engine," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 5, No. 2, 1968, 
pp. 168-172.
    90Lawrence Jr., L., Nesbitt, M. W., Huse, A. K., and Olson, D., "Interim Engineering Report on 2000 Pound Acid Aniline 
Variable Thrust Liquid Propellant Rocket Engine," Reaction Motors, Inc., RMI-205N-2, Dover, NJ, 22 Aug. 1947.
    91Gunter, F. L. and Fahrenholz, F. E., "Final Report on a Study of Rocket Thrust Control by Gas Injection," Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Naval Supersonic Laboratory, Technical Report 448, Cambridge, MA, May 1961.
    92Martin, A. I., "The Aerodynamic Variable Nozzle," Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 24, No. 5, 1957, pp. 357.
    93"F-1 Thrust Vector Control Study," Rocketdyne Engineering, R-1717, 28 Oct. 1959.
    94Riviere, R. R., "An Analytical Study on Efficiency of Variable Th rust Liquid Rocket Engines," U.S. Army, RP -TM-61-1, 
Huntsville, AL, 12 Sep. 1961.
    95"Proposed 5,000 Pound Variable Thrust Engine Development Program," Reaction Motors, Inc., 24, Oct. 1950.
    96Fredrickson, H., Rice, P. J., and Amneus, J. S., "Second Progress Report on Rocket Motor Throttling," Willow Run Research 
Center Engineering Research Institute University of Michigan, UMM-89, Jan. 1952.
    97Tomazic, W. A., "Rocket-Engine Throttling," NACA, NACA RM E55J20, Cleveland, OH.
    98Elverum Jr., G., Staudhammer, P., Miller, J., and Hoffman, A., "The Descent Engine for the Lunar Module," AIAA 3rd 
Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference, AIAA Paper 67-521, 1967.
    99Gilroy, R. and Sackheim, R., "The Lunar Module Descent Engine - A Historical Summary," AIAA/ASME/ASME/ASEE 25th 
Joint Propulsion Conference, AIAA Paper 89-2385, 1989.
    100Dressler, G. A., "The Deep Throttling Pintle Injector: History, Technology and Application to Near -Term Programs," 53rd 
JANNAF Propulsion Meeting, 2005.
    101Bennett, F. V., "Apollo Experience Report - Mission Planning for Lunar Module Descent and Ascent," National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration, NASA TN D-6846, Washington, DC, Jun. 1972.

[PDF PAGE 39]
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
39
    102Johnson, R. J., Boyd, B. R., and Smith, T. H., "Application of the MI RA 150A Variable Thrust Rocket Engine to Manned 
Lunar Exploration Flying Systems," AIAA 3rd Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference, AIAA Paper 67-505, 1967.
    103Johnson, R. J., Boyd, B. R., and Smith, T. H., "Application of the MIRA 150A Variable -Thrust Engine to Manned Lunar 
Flying Systems," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 5, No. 7, 1968, pp. 849-851.
    104Shieber, H. and Rupert, R. C., "Assurance of Service Life of the MIRA 150A Variable Thrust Rocket Engine," AIAA Joint 
Propulsion Specialists Conference, AIAA 65-608, 1965.
    105Shieber, H. and Rupert, R. C., "Assurance of Service Life of the MIRA 150A Variable Thrust Rocket Engine," Journal of 
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 3, No. 7, 1966, pp. 1034-1038.
    106Watkins 1st Lt. USAF, F. E., "A Design for Throttling a Gaseous Propellant, Film Cooled, Rocket Motor by Injector Area 
Variation," Master of Science Air Force Institute of Technology Air University, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 1965.
    107Smith III 1st Lt. USAF, C. D., "The Design, Construction, and Test of a Throttling System for a Gaseous Propellant Rocket 
Motor," Master of Science Air Force Institute of Technology Air University, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 1966.
    108De Groot 1st Lt. USAF, F. J., "Thrust Variatio n of a Gaseous Propellant Rocket Engine," Master of Science Air Force 
Institute of Technology Air University, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 1967.
    109Wernle II 1st Lt. USAF, C. F., "Throttling Rocket Engine," Master of Science Air Force Institute of Technology Air 
University, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 1968.
    110Ow, G. Y. W., "An Evaluation of Film Cooled Gaseous Hydrogen and Oxygen Rocket Engine of 100 Pounds Thrust," 
Master of Science Air Force Institute of Technology Air University, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH, 1960.
    111Chianese, S. G., Majamaki, A. N., and Gavitt, K. R., "NGST TR202 Throttling Lunar Descent Pintle Engine," 54th JANNAF 
Propulsion Meeting, 2007.
    112Majamaki, A. N., Chianese, S. G., and Kim, T. S., "TR 202 Deep Throttling Lunar Descent Engine Pintle Injector 
Technology Development Status," JANNAF 6th MSS / 4th LPS / 3rd SPS Joint Meeting, 2008.
    113Majamaki, A. N. and Chianese, S. G., "TR202 Variable Thrust Pintle Descent/Ascent Engine (Cumulative Thr ough Phase 
II, Option I)," Northrop Grumman Space Technology, NASA CR-2008-215472, Sep. 2008.
    114Mikhaylov, V. V. and Bazarov, V. G., "Throttled Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines (from Russian -  Drosseliruyemyye 
Zhidkostnyye Raketnyye Dvigateli)," Report FTD-1D(RS)T-0960-86 Machine Translation, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, 
OH (Original - Moscow), 15 Dec. 1986 (Original - 1985).
    115Bazarov, V., Yang, V., and Puri, P., "Design and Dynamics of Jet and Swirl Injectors," Vol. 200 American Institute o f 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., Reston, VA, 2004, pp. 19-103.
    116"Liquid Rocket Thrust Chambers: Aspects of Modeling, Analysis, and Design," Vol. 200 AIAA, Reston, VA, 2004.
    117Santoro, R. J., "Demonstration of Throttleable LOX/GH2 Injector Concepts Final Technical Report," The Pennsylvania State 
University, Dec. 2001.
    118Greene, C., Woodward, R., Pal, S., and Santoro, R., "Design and Study of a LOX/GH 2 Throttleable Swirl Injector for 
Rocket Applications," 38th JANNAF Combustion Subcommittee Meeting, CPIA-Publ-712-Vol-1, 2002.

[PDF PAGE 40]
Liquid-Propellant Rocket Engine Throttling:
A Comprehensive Review
Matt Casiano – NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
Jim Hulka – Jacobs Engineering, ESTS Group
Vigor Yang – Georgia Institute of Technology
45th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit
2 – 5 August 2009

[PDF PAGE 41]
Objective
The Vision for Space Exploration outlined in the NASA Authorization Act of
2005 brought a renewed interest to throttleable liquid rocket engines (LREs).
• Throttling LREs can continuously follow the most economical thrust curve
and are applicable to
– Planetary entry and descent
– Space rendezvous
– Orbital maneuvering (orientation and stabilization in space)
– Hovering / hazard avoidance
– Aircraft rocket engine control
– Ballistic missile defense trajectory control
• The primary objective is to review LRE throttling techniques and to examine
the concerns and issues as well as compare the advantages and
shortcomings.
Casiano/ER42 	 2

[PDF PAGE 42]
Outline
• LRE Throttling Background
• LRE Throttling Methods and Discussion of Selected Programs
– High-pressure-drop systems
– Dual-manifold injectors
– Gas injection
– Multiple chambers
– Pulse modulation
– Throat throttling
– Variable area injectors
– Hydrodynamically dissipative injectors
– Combined methods
• Summary
Casiano/ER42 	 3

[PDF PAGE 43]
Throttling Background
• Throttling – the nomenclature is used in variable thrust rocket engines
primarily because one of the most common ways of thrust control is to
regulate propellant flow using control valves
• Throttling ranges are mission dependent with higher throttling ratios for
more precise trajectory control
• Thrust equation
− pa) ⋅ AeFT = m^ ⋅ve + (pe
• Controllable physical parameters
– Propellant flow rates
– Propellant types and composition
– Nozzle exit area
– Nozzle throat area
Casiano/ER42 	 4

[PDF PAGE 44]
Throttling Background (cont.)
• Throttleable LREs originally developed in Germany in late 1930s
– Experiments and research led by Major-General Dr. Walter
Dornberger (then Major) and Hellmuth Walter
– November, 1937 a Heinkel He 112 flew at Neuhardenberg,
Germany and was the 1 st aircraft powered by a manually
throttleable rocket engine
– Hellmuth Walter TP-1 rocket engine – 220 lbs rated thrust using a
monopropellant hydrogen peroxide solution
• Throttling Critical Issues
– Combustion and system instabilities
– Performance degradation
– Excessive heat transfer
– Pump dynamics
Casiano/ER42 	 5

[PDF PAGE 45]
High-pressure-drop Systems
• Single, fixed-geometry injectors can generally throttle 2:1 to 3:1 with a
nominal injector configuration and a typical injector pressure drop
• A higher-than-usual injector pressure drop is necessary to maintain a
minimum injector pressure drop at minimum thrust for deep throttling
– Injector stiffness varies linearly with flowrate for liquid propellants
– 5% Op/pc at 10% thrust requires 50% Op/pc at 100% thrust
• Project Thumper – 1948, a General Electric program sponsored by the
US Army to develop high-altitude antiaircraft ballistic missile defense
against the German V-2 rockets
– One of the 1st extensive deep throttling investigations
– High frequency combustion instability, chug, and hydraulic
instabilities were present in the operational map as thrust was
reduced
• Other well known engines/programs using high-pressure-drop systems
– DC-X and DC-XA, 1991
– RD-0120, 1996
– SS M E, 1997
– CECE, 2005
Casiano/ER42 	 6

[PDF PAGE 46]
Common Extensible
Cryogenic Engine (CECE)
at Varying Thrust (2005)
High-pressure-drop Systems (cont.)
• SSME, rated thrust – 470,000 lbs, 1997
– Throttled to 17% of rated thrust
– No issues, only a minor ox boost pump bi-
stability at 50%
– Concerns were mostly pump-related
• Rotordynamic stability
• Running at shaft critical speeds
• HPFTP thrust bearing to lift off
• Pump stall
• Ox boost pump bi-stability
• Pump performance
• CECE, rated thrust – 13,700 lbs, 2005
– Throttled to 8% of rated thrust
– Early onset of chug from oxygen boiling
• Insulated injector decreased the onset
of chug to a lower power level
Casiano/ER42 	 7

[PDF PAGE 47]
Example Dual-manifold Injector Stiffness
Dual-manifold Injectors
• Dual-manifold, two-stage, dual-element, dual-circuit, dual-orifice injector
• Dual-manifold injector is designed to maintain satisfactory injector pressure
drop at low thrust while not requiring excessive pressure drop at full thrust
– Combines two fixed-area injectors into a common structure
– Independent flow control to each injector manifold
• Deep throttling is achieved by
proceeding from two-manifold operation
at high thrust to single-manifold
operation at low thrust, thus changing the
effective injection area
– All the flow transitions to the primary
manifold at the predetermined
transition point
– Transition point historically ranged
between 20% and 50% of full flow
– Operating parameters must be
optimized and still conform to system
pressures
Casiano/ER42 	 8

[PDF PAGE 48]
• Usually on the oxidizer side only
• The high injector pressure drop at low
thrust provides better performance and
improved stability margin
• No moving parts, additional control
valves
Triplet-element Dual-manifold Injector Hardware (1963)
Dual-manifold Injectors (cont.)
P&WA Advanced Throttling Concept Study
Triplet-element Dual-manifold Injector (1963)
Transition can be difficult because of
stability and operational issues
– Instability incited during repriming
of the manifold
– Liquid compressed the gasified
propellant; chug eliminated by
bleeding the gas first
– Complete closure of the secondary
manifold can cause overheating
and contamination with comb. gas9
Casiano/ER42

[PDF PAGE 49]
Dual-manifold throttling performance in
Rocketdyne research engine, FLOX / MMH
• Other well-known programs
– XLR-129, 1967
– AETB, 1990
Dual-manifold Injectors (cont.)
• Chamber Technology for Space Storable
Propellants, rated thrust – 1000 lbs, 1964
– Rocketdyne research engine
– Thrust varied from 15% to 150% rated
thrust with FLOX / storable fuel
– Transition at 49% thrust
– Peak performance at secondary
manifold flow cutoff, high injection
velocity
– System response delay occurred when
throttling up due to the need to reprime
the secondary manifold; continuous
flow through secondary manifold
proposed to reduce response time
Casiano/ER42 	 10

[PDF PAGE 50]
Gas Injection
• Gas Injection, foamed flow, propellant aeration
• Gas injected into liquid propellant reduces the bulk density, and thus
increases the injector pressure drop (while flow rate is essentially
unchanged), and subsequently increases injector stiffness
m^= CD⋅ Aj ⋅ 2⋅ ρ  ⋅Δp
• Gas Injection comments
– Improves performance at low thrust by improving atomization
– Improves chug stability margin
– Usually this requires a weight penalty for the equipment
– Homogeneous gas injection to prevent low frequency instabilities
• Other well-known programs
– SE-10, 1963
– CECE, 2005
Casiano/ER42 	 11

[PDF PAGE 51]
Rocketdyne Advanced Development Engine (1965)
Multiple Chambers
• Multiple chamber throttling is performed by stopping flow through one or
more chambers or varying thrust of each chamber independently
– Can provide a deeper throttling by independently varying each
chamber by a small amount
• Used on aerospike engines by coordinating banks of chambers
• Russians used multiple chambers for reasons other than throttling
– Manufacturability
– Combustion stability
– Engine-out reliability
• Multiple chambers do not
provide optimum engine
weight
• Other well-known engines
– RD-170, 1976-1986
– RD-180, 1992-1999
Casiano/ER42 	 12

[PDF PAGE 52]
Pulse Modulation
• Pulse-width modulation is on-off cycling that provides quasi-steady state
average thrust
• Predominantly used in monopropellant engines
• V-1 buzz bomb pulses at 100 Hz
• Pulse detonation engines (PDEs) are a similar more recent technology
– Oxidizer and fuel mixture is supersonic at detonation
– Process is more efficient, but difficulties converting energy into
efficient thrust
• Pulsing concerns and disadvantages
– Need fast response valving
– Performance is low due to transients
– Shock loading and heat soak into chamber head end
• Pulsing techniques
– Thrust interval is fixed, thrust magnitude is variable
– Thrust interval is variable, thrust magnitude is fixed
13

[PDF PAGE 53]
Pulse Modulation (cont.)
• Bell Aerospace Lunar Flying Vehicle Study, rated thrust – 1000 lbs,
1964
– This engine pulses to obtain a range from 12% to 1 % thrust
– Number of elements need to be
optimized
• High enough performance
• Small enough manifold volume
– Performance is lower for a
comparable steady state operating
point
– Shorter duration
– Transient effects
Bell model 8414
Throttleable Maneuvering Engine
Casiano/ER42 	 14

[PDF PAGE 54]
Throat Throttling
• Throat throttling achieved by two techniques
– Cooled mechanical pintle inserted and retracted through the nozzle
throat region
– Gas injected into the throat
• At constant propellant pressures, the throat restriction increases the
chamber pressure, which decreases the injector pressure drop and
subsequently reduces propellant flow rates and thrust
• Chamber pressure increases as
thrust is decreased
– Maximum theoretical
performance occurs at lower
thrust
Reaction Motors, Inc. Restrictor Device
Casiano/ER42 	 15

[PDF PAGE 55]
Throat Throttling (cont.)
• General Concerns
– Combustion performance must be optimized since this method is
characterized by a variable L*
– Excessive heat transfer to the pintle device
– Excessive vibrations
– Need to optimize pintle shape – attributed to nozzle separation performance
loss
– Injector design must provide high injection pressure drops at max
thrust to maintain a minimum injector pressure drop at low thrust
– Gas injection into the throat is impractical for throttling
• Effectiveness dependent on stagnation temperature of
injected gas, needs to be high temperature
Casiano/ER42 	 16

[PDF PAGE 56]
NACA Triplet Impinging Jet Variable Area Injector
Variable Area Injectors
• Most well-known throttleable engine is the Apollo Lunar Module Descent
Engine (LMDE)
• Maximum thrust occurs when the injection orifices are fully open; as the
injection area is reduced using a movable injector component, the chamber
pressure and thrust is reduced, and pressure drop is increased
• Majority of variable area injectors contain a single central pintle feature
• Generally there is a need for flow
control valves in conjunction with
the variable area injector for
complete mixture ratio and throttling
control
Casiano/ER42 	 17

[PDF PAGE 57]
Pintle Injector Operation
LMDE Schematic
Variable Area Injectors (cont.)
• Variable area injector comments
– Design simplicity with some complexity in the
actuating and guiding elements
• Leakage is one concern
– Higher injector pressure drop at lower thrust
providing better atomization and stability
margin at lower thrust
• Requires an optimization between
performance and throttling since the
better atomization occurs at lower thrust
– High frequency combustion stability is
uncommon because of the central location of
the injector element
• First tangential acoustic mode has a
central nodal line; annular reaction zone
helps with radial instability
• Encountered in an early study
• Other well-known engines
– LMDE, 1963
Casiano/ER42– TR202, 2005	 18

[PDF PAGE 58]
LMDE Nominal Duty Cycle
19
Variable Area Injectors (cont.)
• LMDE
– Engine development began in 1963; man-rated by 1967
– Used first in Apollo 5 in unmanned configuration in Jan. 1968
– Used to return the astronauts of Apollo 13 to an earth orbit after an oxygen
tank failure damaged the service module
– Starts to 10% during vehicle stabilization
– No high frequency combustion instabilities attributed to central location of
the pintle element
– Low frequency instability with 20 psi peak-to-peak
– Fuel sleeve movement varied the
injection area of both the fuel and
oxidizer
– Cavitating throttling valves were	 7HRll5T
incorporated to maintain flowrate below
70% thrust
– Injector orifice changes did not
affect mixture ratio
– Eliminated large pressure loss	 L
penalties at higher thrust that would
Casiano/ER42 	 be present with high cavitating flow

[PDF PAGE 59]
Hydrodynamically Dissipative Injectors
• Use fluid dynamics to obtain adequate impedance across the injector
– Increased inertance by lengthening the elements
– Increased resistance by using capillary tube elements
– Effective control of the resistance by varying element hydraulics: variable
discharge coefficient
• Usually a subset of other methodologies such as high-pressure-drop injectors or
dual-manifold injectors
• Usually a simple design, but there is limited work in this area
• Professor Bazarov has applied classic swirl theory to dual-channel tangential
orifice injectors
– Tangential-entry dual-inlet swirl injectors throttle by means of varying
hydraulic conditions
– Using a dual-channel injector element: the pre-injection swirl flow can be
managed such that a vortex forms inside the injector passages
– With the variation of flow to each inlet independently, the vortex and orifice
conditions are affected - thus controlling the discharge coefficient
– Penn State has experimented with Bazarov’s injectors over a 10:1 throttling
range
Casiano/ER42 	 20

[PDF PAGE 60]
Combined Methods
• Combined methods allow an even deeper throttling by combining throttling
methods
– Carry the advantages of two or more methods
– Usually adds complexity
– Generally all methods need flow control to some extent
• Some methods inherently are combined methods
– Variable area injector
– Dual-manifold injector
– Hydrodynamically dissipative injectors
• Bell Aerospace had combined high-pressure-drop injector with pulsing
– 100-to-1 throttling achieved
• Pratt & Whitney Aircraft combined a constant area injector with a variable area
injector
– At low thrust, a variable area injector maintained enough pressure drop
– At higher thrust, a constant area injector allowed increasing pressure drop
– Reasonable pressure drop over a wide range while providing enough
stiffness at high thrust to prevent low frequency instabilities
Casiano/ER42 	 21

[PDF PAGE 61]
Summary
• Throttling critical issues
– Combustion and system instabilities
– Performance degradation
– Excessive heat transfer
– Pump dynamics
• Throttling Methods
– High-pressure-drop systems
– Dual-manifold injectors
– Gas injection
– Multiple chambers
– Pulse modulation
– Throat throttling
– Variable area injectors
– Hydrodynamically dissipative injectors
– Combined methods
Casiano/ER42 	 22