[PDF PAGE 1]
Validation of the LUMEN EcosimPro Model with Hot-Fire
Test Data
Eldin Kurudzija⋆†, Kai Dresia⋆†, Vincent Bareiß⋆, Christopher Groll⋆, Max Axel Müller⋆, Tobias Traudt⋆,
Michael Börner⋆, Wolfgang Armbruster⋆, Dmitry Suslov⋆, Justin Hardi⋆, Günther Waxenegger-Wilfing⋆‡,
Jan Deeken⋆§
⋆German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Space Propulsion, 74239 Lampoldshausen, Germany
‡University of Würzburg, Institute of Computer Science, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
§ RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Jet Propulsion and Turbomachinery, 52062 Aachen, Germany
Eldin.Kurudzija@dlr.de, Kai.Dresia@dlr.de
†These authors contributed equally
Abstract
LUMEN (Liquid Upper stage deMonstrator ENgine) is a LOX/LNG expander-bleed type engine with two
turbopumps in the 25 kN thrust range. The project was started in 2017 at the Institute of Space Propulsion
of the German Aerospace Center (DLR). Since then, several test campaigns have been carried out for the
thrust chamber assembly and each turbopump while the first hot-fire test of the whole engine was suc-
cessfully conducted in 2024. The experimental data collected during each test campaign provides an ideal
basis for validating transient simulation models at component and system level. The LUMEN simulation
model is built in EcosimPro with the European Space Propulsion System Simulations (ESPSS) toolkit. In
this work, the models for the combustion chamber, injector, cooling channels, turbines and pumps are first
validated individually. Subsequently, the entire LUMEN model is validated using hot-fire test data. The
results show that critical parameters, such as the combustion chamber pressure, the fuel injection temper-
ature and the rotational speed of each turbopump, are modelled with high accuracy. Overall, the mean
average percentage error is below 5 % for each quantity. The results of this work allow fast, simple and
risk-free predictions of the system behaviour of LUMEN. This is particularly important in the preparation
of future test campaigns and for developing intelligent controllers and health monitoring systems.
1. Introduction
The Institute of Space Propulsion at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) initiated the LUMEN (L
iquid Upper stage
deMonstrator ENgine) project in 2017, aiming to develop system-level expertise for the operation of liquid rocket
engines. LUMEN, as shown in Figure 1, is an expander-bleed rocket engine which operates with liquid oxygen (LOX)
and liquefied methane (LNG). Each propellant is pressurised by its own turbopump. LNG is partially used for the
regenerative cooling of the main combustion chamber (MCC) in a counterflow-arrangement. The heated LNG mass
flow is then split between a mixer, where it is used to elevate the temperature of the fuel before injection into the
MCC, and the cooling channels of the nozzle extension (NE). The NE coolant is then used to drive the turbines before
being discarded. LUMEN generates 25 kN thrust in its nominal operating point at a combustion chamber pressure pcc
of 60 bar and a mixture ratio ROF of 3.4. In its latest configuration, LUMEN uses three electrically actuated control
valves for setting the operating point: the turbine fuel valve (TFV), the turbine oxidiser valve (TOV) and the fuel
control valve (FCV).
Within the LUMEN project the thrust chamber assembly (TCA) and each turbopump were first developed and
tested individually before hot-fire test campaigns of the whole engine were successfully conducted at the European
research and technology test bench P8.3 in Lampoldshausen in 2024 and 2025 [8, 18]. Two combustors with similar
pressure loss and heat transfer characteristics were developed and tested in the project. The first combustor is con-
ventionally manufactured and uses a CuCrZr inner liner with axially milled and galvanically closed cooling channels.
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) was used to manufacture the second single piece combustor liner. Details of the the
development and manufacturing process of the conventional combustor and the additive manufactured combustor are
provided in Haemisch et al. [11] and Suslov et al. [16, 17]. The injector head features 42 shear-coaxial elements. Char-
acterisation of the combustion process and verification of flame anchoring are achieved by means of a measurement
ring equipped with temperature and pressure sensors as well as optical probes.
Copyright © 2025 by Eldin Kurudzija et al.. Published by the EUCASS association with permission.
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105
11ᵀᴴ EUROPEAN CONFERENCE FOR AERONAUTICS AND SPACE SCIENCES (EUCASS)

[PDF PAGE 2]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
NE
INJ
MCC
IGN
FCV
RAV
BPV
XCV
MIXERMFVMOVOCV
Interface
LOX
Interface
LNG
LOX
Pump
LNG
Pump
LNG
Turbine
LOX
Turbine
TFVTOV
TBV
Figure 1: Flow scheme of LUMEN.
The fuel and oxidiser turbopump (FTP and OTP), as shown in Figure 2, use a single-stage centrifugal pump
and supersonic impulse turbine. The design has been carried out using in-house tools [18]. Details of the pump and
turbine design are given in Hahn et al. [4, 5]. To increase the life expectancy of the bearing system, oil lubrication with
commercial of the shelf bearings is used. With a minimum expected life of 1000 h, the bearing system exceeds the life
time of typical turbopump designs significantly. The maximum rotational speed of the OTP and FTP is 28 000 rpm and
50 000 rpm, respectively.
Figure 2: OTP after sub-component test (left) and FTP during hot-fire test (right).
In the current shift of the space industry towards re-usability and cost reduction, advanced technologies such
as intelligent control and health monitoring play a vital role. Given its modular design, extensive instrumentation
and wide throttling range, LUMEN is ideally suited for testing and developing control and health monitoring systems
under realistic conditions. The development of those technologies requires a transient simulation model and a detailed
understanding of the engine. The sub-component and hot-fire tests, which were carried out within the LUMEN project
provide a large database for building and validating the required simulation model. This paper presents the detailed
modeling of the LUMEN simulation model using the European Space Propulsion System Simulation (ESPSS) toolkit
of EcosimPro and its validation using experimental data. For this, an overview of the test activities which were carried
out within the LUMEN project is given first. After, the sub-component modelling and validation are described. Finally,
the complete simulation model is validated using experimental data from the latest hot-fire test campaign.
2
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 3]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
40 50 60 70 80
Combustion chamber pressure pcc [bar]
2.6
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2Mixture Ratio ROF [-]
LUMEN envelope
BKL-V1 BKL-V3 (LPBF)
Figure 3: Steady-state load points achieved during TCA
test campaigns for both combustors [11, 16, 17].
 Figure 4: Thrust chamber during hot fire testing.
2. Test activity overview
Design qualification and characterisation of each subsystem were achieved over multiple test campaigns. This includes
two test campaigns for the TCA, two test campaigns for each turbopump and two hot-fire test campaigns of the whole
engine. In the following section an overview of these test campaigns is provided.
2.1 Thrust chamber assembly
The TCA test campaigns were conducted at the P8 test facility in Lampoldshausen, focusing on the characterisation of
the injector head, combustion chamber, nozzle extension, regenerative cooling system and control valves [11, 16]. In
addition to qualifying the design of both combustors, several goals were successfully achieved:
• Characterisation of the injector head pressure loss
• Determination of the combustion efficiency and minimum required cooling channel mass flow
• Performance characterisation with fuel injection temperatures between 210 K and 290 K
In total, 27 tests have been conducted with an accumulated test duration of 24 minutes. As shown in Figure 3, represen-
tative steady-state load points have been achieved for both combustors within the LUMEN operational envelope. More
details on the experimental setup and results can be found in Börner et al. [3], Hardi et al. [13], Haemisch et al. [11]
and Suslov et al. [16, 17].
2.2 Turbopumps
Multiple test campaigns have been conducted for the characterisation of the performance of both turbopumps, the
qualification of the mechanical and thermal design and the development of a reliable chill-down procedure [18]. For
each turbopump unit individual test campaigns have been conducted. Following the initial water test of the OTP,
cryogenic test campaigns were conducted at the P8.3 test facility in Lampoldshausen. In those test campaigns, the
turbine was driven with gaseous nitrogen and the pump discharge pressure and mass flow were set by a downstream
control valve and orifice.
During the OTP test campaign at the P8.3 test facility, the employment of a neural network based controller for
tracking reference trajectories of the pump discharge pressure and pump mass flow rate was successfully demonstrated
for the first time by Dresia et al. [7]. The intelligent controller achieved high tracking accuracy over an accumulated
runtime of 500 s with errors below 1 %. In addition, fault diagnostic methods were successfully tested in the FTP test
campaign by Kurudzija et al. [14]. Within this work, semi-empirical models were derived which accurately describe
the relationship between the pump discharge pressure, mass flow rate, rotational speed and the actuator position of
the FCV . The mathematical models were successfully employed at the test bench P8.3 and achieved errors below 3 %.
In post-processing, a fault in the rotational speed sensor with a detection delay below 1 s could be detected. This
demonstrated the capability of using those models for fault diagnostic in future health monitoring systems. Over five
test campaigns, the OTP and FTP accumulated a runtime of 88 minutes and 44 minutes, respectively.
3
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 4]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
40 50 60 70 80
Combustion chamber pressure pcc [bar]
2.6
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2Mixture Ratio ROF [-]
LUMEN envelope
Demo 24 Demo 25
Figure 5: Steady-state load points achieved during the hot-
fire test campaigns [8].
 Figure 6: LUMEN hot fire testing at test bench P8.3.
2.3 Engine
Following the sub-component tests, the entire LUMEN demonstrator engine has been successfully tested and put into
service at the test bench P8.3 in 2024 as shown in Figure 6. Within this test campaign, the ignition sequence was
initially established, with the subsequent characterisation of the operational envelope. With the objective of further
expanding the operational envelope, testing the throttling capabilities and optimising sub-components of LUMEN, a
second test campaign was conducted in 2025. In comparison to the preceding test campaign, the LOX impeller has
been improved, an injector head which features swirl elements on the inner row and shear-coaxial elements on the outer
row has been utilised, the chill-down process has been improved and the system pressure losses have been reduced [8].
Over the course of both test campaigns, numerous significant milestones have been achieved:
• Characterisation of the engine for combustion chamber pressures between 38 bar and 78 bar.
• Demonstration of the repeatability of the engine conditioning and ignition sequences.
• Demonstration of high durability of the TCA over 27 ignitions and test operation exceeding 24 minutes.
• Validation of the thermal design of the turbopumps during long-duration tests.
• Establishment of a large database on LOX/LNG injection over a wide fuel injection temperature and combustion
chamber pressure range.
• Demonstration of the self-start capability without relying on a GN2 turbine starter.
• Demonstration of a neural network controller for thrust and mixture ratio control.
• Demonstration of operation along a sequence analogous to a moon landing.
In total, 17 ignitions of LUMEN have been successfully performed in both test campaigns with an accumulated hot-
fire test duration of over 20 minutes [8]. As shown in Figure 5, the whole operational envelope of LUMEN has been
successfully characterised in both test campaigns. More details are provided in Dresia et al. [8].
3. Fundamentals
Following the establishment of a large database for each sub-component and the entire engine, accurate transient sim-
ulation models can be developed and validated across the whole operational envelope of LUMEN. The simulation
models are built in EcosimPro 7.0.10. In the following section an overview of the measurement uncertainties is pro-
vided, followed by a description of the mathematical fundamentals of EcosimPro.
4
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 5]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
Table 1: Measurement accuracy and uncertainties.
Measurement Measurement range Max. uncertainty
Temperature 106 − 313 K ±2.5 K
233 − 648 K ±1.5 K
Mass flow rate 0 − 10 kg/s ±0.03 kg/s
V olumetric flow rate 0 − 12 l/s ±3 %
Pressure 0 − 250 bar ±1 %
Rotational speed 0 − 200 000 rpm ±0.2 %
3.1 Measurement uncertainties
For characterising the operational condition of the components, extensive instrumentation is used within each test
campaign of the LUMEN project. This includes measurements of pressures, temperatures, mass flow rates, rotational
speeds and vibrations. As the fluid properties are varying within the engine, different types of sensors and mea-
surement ranges are used depending on the expected conditions. Thermocouples used for measuring cryogenic and
non-cryogenic temperatures are mostly of type K and introduce an uncertainty of ±2.5 K between 106 K and 313 K
and ±1.5 K between 233 K and 648 K, respectively. A broad range of different static pressure sensors is used within
LUMEN with the maximum uncertainty of the static pressure sensors being ±1 % from the full span measurement
range. For measuring the injection mass flow rate on the LOX and LNG side, Coriolis flow meter are used. The maxi-
mum uncertainty is ±0.03 kg/s. Turbine flow meter are used for the other flow rate measurements. Using temperature
and pressure measurements to estimate the fluid density with lookup tables, the volumetric flow rate is converted to
a mass flow rate measurement in the MCC. The uncertainty of the whole measurement chain is ±3 % [1, 12]. The
rotational speed of the turbopumps is measured with an inductive sensor which has a published linearity of ±0.2 %.
The considered uncertainties are summarized in Table 1.
3.2 Mathematical modeling
EcosimPro solves systems of differential algebraic (DAE) and ordinary differential equations (ODE) and is able to
handle discontinuities introduced by discrete events such as valve switching or phase transition [9]. It uses an object-
oriented modelling approach in which complex physical systems, e.g. the LUMEN engine, are built with more elemen-
tary components, e.g. pipes or valves. Each component is defined by its own system of equations and ports through
which mass, momentum and energy are exchanged. By defining boundary conditions, EcosimPro automatically as-
sembles a global system of equations. Denoting x(t) ∈ Rn as the vector of explicit algebraic variables and y(t) ∈ Rm as
the vector of semi-state and implicit algebraic variables, the mathematical problem can be stated as
x = G(t, y, x, p) and F(t, y, ˙y, x, p) = 0, (1)
where p collects the non-explicit variables. For solving the system of equations, several transient solvers with variable-
step integration can be used. In this work, the sparse CVODE solver with backward differentiation formula is used.
4. Component modeling and validation
The LUMEN simulation model is built using the European Space Propulsion System Simulation (ESPSS) toolkit
version 3.8.1 of EcosimPro. ESPSS provides a comprehensive collection of components for the simulation of rocket
engines and satellites [10]. It includes libraries for calculating the thermodynamic and transport properties for perfect
and real fluids as well as mixtures of fluids and chemicals. Propulsion-specific components such as turbines, pumps,
combustion chambers, pipes and valves are implemented in ESPSS libraries. Governing equations for mass continuity,
momentum and energy conservation are enforced within those components. Each component is characterised by a
unique set of parameters and equations. The details of the most relevant components used in the LUMEN model are
described and validated in the following. As LUMEN’s components have been updated progressively, only stationary
load points from the latest hot-fire test campaign (see Figure 5) are used for validation. The initial modeling of each
component and the complete LUMEN model has been conducted by Dresia [6].
5
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 6]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
4.1 Injector
For modelling the injector, the standard ESPSS component is used [10]. The mass flow ˙m is calculated dynamically by
balancing the momentum using
0.5 I d ˙m
dt =

p + 0.5ρv2
in −

p + 0.5ρv2
out − 0.5 ζ G2
ρin
. (2)
Here I is the inertia of the injector,p the pressure, ρ is the density,v the velocity of the fluid,ζ the effective pressure loss
coefficient andG the mass flow per unit area. The validation of the modeling of the injector is conducted by comparing
the pressure drop across each injector. The pressure drop is a function of the mass flow through the injector, the fluid
density and the area discharge coefficient(CdA)inj, defined as
∆p =
˙m2
inj
2ρ (CdA)2
inj
. (3)
To validate the mathematical models for each injector, the mass flow, inlet temperature and pressure are imposed
as boundary conditions and the outlet pressure is compared against experimental data. As shown in Figure 7, the
model aligns well with experimental data for both injectors. At the given temperatures, LOX can be assumed to be
incompressible, the pressure drop changes therefore approximately quadratically with an increasing mass flow. The
compressibility effects on the LNG side are also accurately modelled. In total, the pressure loss across the LOX and
LNG injector is modeled with errors below 4 % and 5 %, respectively.
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Normalized injector mass flow ˙m [−]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Injector pressure drop ∆p [bar]
Experiment
Ecosim
(a) LOX injector
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
Normalized injector mass flow ˙m [−]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Injector pressure drop ∆p [bar]
Experiment
Ecosim
40 50 60 70
CH4 density ρ [kg/m3]
 (b) LNG injector
Figure 7: Comparison of the predictions of the injector components with experimental data.
4.2 Cooling channels
The regenerative cooling of LUMEN is modeled using two separate cooling channels for the combustion chamber and
nozzle extension, respectively. ESPSS models the cooling channels using a central fluid channel with surrounded wall
components. Fluid dynamic e ffects, such as pressure loss due to internal friction and variations in the velocity of the
cooling medium, as well as thermodynamic effects resulting from heat transfer with the cooling channel walls, are
modeled within the central fluid channel. This represents a resistive flow element, thermally interacting with the metal
structures through a one-dimensional thermal port. The heat transfer inside the metal structure of the cooling channel
due to conductivity is modeled using the wall components. The detailed description of the mathematical model of the
cooling channels is given in [10].
To validate the modeling, the cooling channels are simulated alongside the combustion chamber. The heat
transfer is modeled by a modified Bartz correlation, taking into account the stronger influence of the fuel injection
temperature and combustion chamber pressure for LUMEN [6]. The mass flow, inlet temperature and pressure for
both components are imposed as boundary conditions. Similarly to the injector component, the cooling channel is
validated by comparing the pressure drop as well as the integral heat flux to experimental steady-state points. As
6
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 7]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
shown in Figure 8 the model aligns well with experimental data for both the pressure drop and integrated heat flux.
The maximum error in the pressure drop of the combustion chamber and nozzle extension cooling channels is 1.4 bar
and 1.7 bar, respectively. For the integrated heat flux, the maximum error in both cooling channels is below 6 %.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Normalized mass flow ˙m [−]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Pressure drop ∆p [bar]
Experiment CC
Experiment NE
Ecosim
0 20 40 60 80
Chamber pressure pcc [bar]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Norm. integrated heat flux Q [−]
Experiment CC
Experiment NE
Ecosim
Figure 8: Comparison of the model predictions for the pressure drop and integral heat flux with experimental data.
4.3 Pumps
For modelling the behavior of the pump, ESPSS provides different components [10]. In the early design stage, a generic
pump component can be used in which the performance curves are calculated based on the design point and specific
speed of the pump using Suter curves. To enable accurate modelling of the off-design behavior, performance curves for
head rise and torque can be provided in the standard pump component. In this work, the standard component is used
and the initial performance curves, provided by Hahn et al. [15], are modified to match experimental data.
The rotational speed ω of the pump is calculated dynamically by balancing the torque T at the shaft with the
torque consumed of the pump under consideration of the inertia of the pump Ip
Ip
dω
dt = Tshaft − T. (4)
For energy conservation, the product of enthalpy h and mass flow is balanced under consideration of the added me-
chanical work to the fluid at the inlet
˙mphout = ˙mphin + T ω. (5)
Neglecting cavitation, the mass flow is calculated dynamically with
Ifluid
d ˙mp
dt = (p + 0.5ρv2)in − (p + 0.5ρv2)out + g ρin HT, (6)
where Ifluid is the inertia of the fluid andHT is the total dynamic head. Both characteristic curves are based on the outlet
flow coefficientϕ+ which is defined as
ϕ+ = ˙mp
ρin ω. (7)
The head coefficientψ+ describes the pump head rise normalized by the rotational speed and is modeled as a function
of the outlet flow coefficient
ψ+ = pout − pin
ρin ω2 = f (ϕ+). (8)
In Belyaev [2] the relationship between the flow and head coefficient is expressed as an polynomial relationship
ψ+ = a + b ϕ+ − c ϕ+ϕ+, (9)
where the polynomial coefficient can be derived from the pump design point. In this work, the coefficients are estimated
with experimental data for both pumps. As demonstrated in Figure 9 (a), the polynomial relationship aligns well with
experimental data of the FTP. However, the experimental data of the OTP indicates that the rotational speed has a
stronger influence on the head rise. To account for this behavior, a linear correction term based on the rotational speed
is introduced for the head coefficient
ψ+
corr = ψ+ + f (ω) = f (ϕ+, ω). (10)
7
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 8]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
With this correction, the experimental data of the OTP can be accurately reproduced over a wide flow coefficient
range, as shown in Figure 9 (b). For further validation, an isolated simulation environment is built for each pump.
Each component is simulated individually with imposed boundary conditions from experimental data. In this setup the
inlet temperature and pressure, rotational speed and mass flow are imposed as boundary conditions while the outlet
pressure is used for validation. The maximum errors of the FTP and OTP lies below 1 % and 3 %, respectively. This
demonstrates that the provided relationship for the head and flow coefficient is modeled accurately for both pumps.
0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Outlet flow coefficient φ+ [−]
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Head coefficient ψ+ [−]
Experiment
Ecosim
30 35 40 45 50
Rotational speed N [1000/min]
(a) FTP
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
Outlet flow coefficient φ+ [−]
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
Corrected head coefficient ψ+
corr [−] Experiment
Ecosim
15 20 25 30
Rotational speed N [1000/min]
 (b) OTP
Figure 9: Relationship between the flow coefficient and the head coefficient for the FTP and the corrected head coeffi-
cient for the OTP. All coefficients are normalized against the nominal operational point.
The second pump curve describes the torque coefficientλ+ as a function of the flow coefficient
λ+ = T
ρin ω2 = f (ϕ+), (11)
where T is the consumed torque of the pump. During the LUMEN test campaigns, no torque measurement has been
conducted. For estimating the torque coefficient, the fluid enthalpyh at the inlet and outlet is estimated using tempera-
ture and pressure measurements. Using the definition of the isentropic efficiency
ηp = hout,s − hin
hout − hin
(12)
and rearranging the torque, head and flow coefficient as
ηp = ϕ+ ψ+
λ+ . (13)
the torque coefficient can be estimated using the available measurements. As shown in Figure 10, the torque coefficients
for both pumps can be estimated such that the isentropic efficiencies aligns with experimental data. For validating the
torque curve, the same simulation setup as for the head curve is used and the outlet temperature is compared against
experimental data. The maximum error for the FTP and OTP is 1.6 K and 1.8 K, respectively. This indicates that the
torque for both pumps is modeled accurately. However, it should be mentioned that the fluid temperature increase
between inlet and outlet of the pumps is in the order of 10 K and subject to both measurement uncertainties of the
cryogenic thermocouples as well as heat ingress through the pump structure.
4.4 Turbine
Analogous to the pump, ESPSS provides multiple components for the turbine [10]. The generic turbine calculates the
performance map based on the rated conditions. In the standard turbine component, this map is an input parameter
which allows an accurate modeling of the off-design behavior. In this work, the standard component is used and the
initial performance curves, provided by Hahn et al. [15], are modified to match experimental data.
The mechanical balance and energy conservation of the turbine is similar to the pump (see Equation 4 and 5)
with the difference that the mechanical work is added to the fluid at the outlet. As LUMEN uses supersonic impulse
8
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 9]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Outlet flow coefficient φ+ [−]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Isentropic efficiency ηp [−]
Experiment
Ecosim
30 35 40 45 50
Rotational speed N [1000/min]
(a) FTP
0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10
Outlet flow coefficient φ+ [−]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Isentropic efficiency ηp [−]
Experiment
Ecosim
15 20 25 30
Rotational speed N [1000/min]
 (b) OTP
Figure 10: Relationship of the isentropic pump efficiency and flow coefficient for both turbopumps. As the efficiency
of the OTP is modeled as a function of the corrected head coe fficient, which is dependent on rotational speed, the
colored region shows the efficiency for the boundaries of the rotational speed in the operational envelope of LUMEN.
All quantities are normalized against the nominal operational point.
turbines, the inlet mass flow is computed assuming choked flow at the throat of the inlet nozzles
Ifluid
d ˙mt
dt = (p + 0.5ρv2)t,in − (p + 0.5ρv2)t,out − 0.5(ζ + ζcrit) G2
ρin
. (14)
Here ζ is the pressure loss coefficient andζcrit is the sonic flow correction factor. For the construction of the turbine
performance map, coefficients describing the blade speed, pressure ratio and torque are used. The speed coe fficient
Nred relates the blade speed to the velocity of the working fluid as
Nred = rt ω
aout
, (15)
where rt is the characteristic blade tip radius and aout is the speed of sound at the outlet. The total pressure ratio πt is
defined as the ratio of the total pressure at the inlet and outlet
πt = pt,in
pt,out
. (16)
The specific torque τ is a function of the speed coefficient and total pressure ratio and can be expressed as
τ = T
rt ˙mt aout
= f (Nred, πt). (17)
As mechanical losses are considered, the turbine performance maps are estimated by simulating the balancing of turbine
generated and pump consumed power. For this, the turbines and pumps are simulated in an isolated simulation environ-
ment using boundary conditions for the mass flow, rotational speed, inlet temperature and pressure from experimental
steady-state points. Finally, the pump performance curves described in Section 4.3 are fixed and the performance map
of the turbine is updated iteratively until a power balance is approximately reached. The results of both turbopumps
are shown in Figure 11. The maximum power imbalance for the FTP and OTP is 6 % and 5 %, respectively. This
demonstrates that an approximate power balance over the entire range of experimental data could be reached using the
estimated turbine performance map.
5. System analysis
As demonstrated in the previous section, the modeling of the individual components is accurate. However, coupling
effects and propagation of unavoidable modeling errors can result in an inaccurate complete model. For validation,
all components are integrated into a complete model of LUMEN. The predictions of this model are compared against
experimental data from a single test run after the ignition and start-up of the engine. This test run has been specifically
9
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 10]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
0 50 100 150
Pump power Pp [kW]
0
50
100
150Turbine power Pt [kW]
FTP
OTP
Power balance
Figure 11: Power balance for both turbopumps.
designed for validation purposes, as it covers the entire operational range of LUMEN, including steps and ramps as
transients. The temperature and pressure conditions at the interface of the test bench for LOX and LNG are imposed
as inlet boundary conditions. Outlet boundary conditions are set to standard temperature and pressure. The control
signals of TFV , TOV and FCV are also imposed as boundary condition. The comparison of the model predictions and
the experimental data for various pressures and temperatures, the rotational speed of both turbopumps and the mixture
ratio is shown in Figure 12. The mean average percentage error (MAPE) over the entire test duration and the maximum
absolute error of steady-state points are reported in Table 2.
Overall, the model is able to accurately reproduce the combustion chamber pressure and mixture ratio with
a MAPE of 2.4 % and 3.5 %, respectively. With a maximum error of 2 .4 bar or 3.3 %, the steady-state combustion
chamber pressure is modeled with high accuracy. Generally, the model captures pressures with high accuracy both in
steady-state and during transients. The oxidiser pump outlet pressure is modeled the poorest with a maximum absolute
error and MAPE of 7.4 % and 4.1 %, respectively. Despite the considerable variation, this is solely 3.2 bar. This
indicates that the model is able to replicate the pressure drop across the cooling channels, valves, pipes and injectors.
The same trend is evident for the temperatures. The maximum steady-state error is reached for the cooling channel
outlet temperature with 6.0 %, respectively 25.4 K. As the rate of change of the temperatures has a high time scale, the
transient dynamics can be effectively evaluated using the MAPE. The maximum MAPE is 2.1 % for the cooling channel
outlet temperature which indicates that the model is able to accurately capture the temperature increase in the feedlines
and cooling channels. Further, the model is able to replicate the rotational speed of both turbopumps with steady-
state errors of approximately 3.0 % and a MAPE of 1.8 %. Given the high modeling accuracy in the temperatures,
pressures and rotational speeds, it can be concluded that the torque relationships for the pumps and turbines, which
were determined with high uncertainty, reflect the correct trend. The model is also able to replicate the mass flows
accurately over the whole test duration. This is indicated by the maximum steady-state error and MAPE of the mixture
ratio of 5.2 % and 3.5 %, respectively.
Table 2: Prediction error of the LUMEN simulation model for different pressures, temperatures, the rota-
tional speed of both turbopumps and the mixture ratio.
Parameter MAPE 1 Max. percentage error2 Max. absolute error2
Combustion chamber pressure pcc 2.4 % 3.3 % 2.4 bar
Fuel pump outlet pressure pf,out 2.8 % 4.8 % 5.2 bar
Oxidiser pump outlet pressure po,out 4.1 % 7.4 % 3.2 bar
Fuel injection temperature Tinf,f 1.9 % 4.8 % 15.1 K
Cooling channel outlet temperature Trc,out 2.1 % 6.0 % 25.4 K
Turbine inlet temperature Tt,in 2.0 % 4.0 % 23.2 K
Rotational speed FTP NFTP 1.5 % 3.1 % 1292 rpm
Rotational speed OTP NOTP 1.8 % 2.6 % 684 rpm
Mixture ratio ROF 3.5 % 5.2 % 0.2
1
Calculation over the test duration after ignition and start-up.
2
Only steady-state points are considered.
Overall, the high accuracy of the simulation model over the entire operational envelope of LUMEN makes it
10
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 11]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time t [s]
25
50
75
100
125
150Pressure p [bar]
pcc pf, out po, out
Ecosim Experiment
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time t [s]
200
300
400
500
600Temperature T [K]
Tinj, f Tt, in Trc, out
Ecosim Experiment
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time t [s]
10
20
30
40
50Rotational speed N [1000/min]
NFTP NOTP
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time t [s]
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0Mixture Ratio ROF [−]Ecosim Experiment
Figure
12: Comparison of the predictions of the LUMEN simulation model with experimental data. The compared
values are the combustion chamber pressure pcc, the fuel and oxidiser pump outlet pressure pf,out and po,out, the fuel
injection temperature Tinf,f, the cooling channel outlet temperature Trc,out and turbine inlet temperature Tinf,f and Tt,in,
the rotational speed of the FTP and OTP NFTP and NOTP and the mixture ratio ROF.
well-suited for a wide range of applications. During the 2025 hot-fire test campaign, the model has been successfully
used to generate a sequence replicating the thrust profile of the Apollo 15 Lunar Module during landing [8]. With
this bi-directional validation, it can also be concluded that the model is well-suited for the development of intelligent
controllers and health monitoring systems which are key of next generation rocket engines.
6. Summary and outlook
In this work the LUMEN simulation model which was initially developed by Dresia [6] using EcosimPro with the
European Space Propulsion System Simulation (ESPSS) toolkit is updated and validated using experimental data from
the latest test campaign conducted in 2025. For this, the components of the thrust chamber, cooling channels, injectors,
turbines and pumps are built and validated individually using experimental data from the latest hot-fire test campaign
of LUMEN. All components were modeled with high accuracy. After, all components are integrated into a complete
LUMEN model. The complete model is compared against experimental data from a test run which covers the complete
operational envelope of LUMEN with steps and ramps as transients. Over the entire test duration, the model demon-
strated a high degree of accuracy with a mean average percentage error of 2.4 % and 3.5 % for the combustion chamber
pressure and mixture ratio, respectively.
Despite its high accuracy, the simulation model is developed with remaining uncertainty in the torque character-
istics for the FTP and OTP. In accordance with LUMEN’s roadmap, test campaigns are scheduled with the purpose of
acquiring data for the complete characterisation of the turbines and pumps of the FTP and OTP. Within future activities
it is planned to compare the simulation model against experimental data of more test runs. In the subsequent phase
of the project, it is planned to develop intelligent controllers and fault diagnosis systems using the simulation model.
Those advanced technologies will be experimentally tested at the European research and technology test bench P8.3 in
Lampoldshausen in the future, paving the way for next generation rocket engines.
11
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105

[PDF PAGE 12]
V ALIDATION OF THE LUMEN ECOSIMPRO MODEL
References
[1] W. Armbruster. Untersuchung injektorgekoppelter Verbrennungsinstabilitäten in einer kryogenen Raketen-
brennkammer. Ph.d. thesis, RWTH Aachen, 2022.
[2] E. Belyaev, V . Chevanov, and V . Chervakov.Mathematical Modeling of the Work Process in Liquid-Propellant
Rocket Engines (in Russian). MAI Moscow, 1999.
[3] M. Börner, J. Martin, J. S. Hardi, D. Suslov, J. C. Deeken, and M. Oschwald. Lumen Thrust Chamber - Flame
Anchoring for Shear Coaxial Injectors. In 7th Edition of the Space Propulsion Conference, Virtual, 2021.
[4] R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, J. C. Deeken, M. Oschwald, and S. Schlechtriem. Turbine Design and Optimization Tool
for LUMEN Expander Cycle Demonstrator. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1909(1), doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/1909/1/012053, 2021.
[5] R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, J. C. Deeken, T. Traudt, M. Oschwald, S. Schlechtriem, and H. Negishi. LUMEN
Turbopump - Preliminary Design of Supersonic Turbine. In 32nd International Symposium on Space Technology
and Science, Fukui, Japan, 2019.
[6] K. Dresia. Rocket Engine Control with Deep Reinforcement Learning. Ph.d. thesis, RWTH Aachen, 2025.
[7] K. Dresia, A. Adler, A. M. Saraf, R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, E. Kurudzija, T. Traudt, J. C. Deeken, and
G. Waxenegger-Wilfing. Rocket Engine Control with Neural Networks: Experimental Results of the LUMEN
Turbopump Test Campaign. In AIAA SCITECH 2023 Forum, National Harbor, United States of America, 2023.
[8] K. Dresia, T. Traudt, M. Börner, D. Suslov, W. Armbruster, R. dos Santos Hahn, E. Kurudzija, C. Groll, M. A.
Müller, S. Klein, J. Hämisch, J. Deeken, J. Hardi, and S. Schlechtriem. Hot-Fire Testing and System Analysis of
the LUMEN Liquid Upper Stage Demonstrator Engine. In3rd Int. Conf. on Flight Vehicles, Aerothermodynamics
and Re-entry (FAR), Arcachon, France, 2025.
[9] Empresarios Agrupados. EcosimPro 2024 Version 7.0 Complete Reference Manual, 2024.
[10] Empresarios Agrupados and ESA. ESPSS 3.8.1 User Manual, 2024.
[11] J. Haemisch, D. Suslov, G. Waxenegger-Wilfing, K. Dresia, and M. Oschwald. LUMEN - Design of the Re-
generative Cooling System for an Expander Bleed Cycle Engine Using Methane. In 7th Edition of the Space
Propulsion Conference, Virtual, 2021.
[12] J. S. Hardi. Experimental Investigation of High Frequency Combustion Instabilities in Cryogenic Oxygen-
Hydrogen Rocket Engines. Ph.d. thesis, The University of Adelaide, 2012.
[13] J. S. Hardi, J. Martin, M. Son, W. Armbruster, J. C. Deeken, D. Suslov, and M. Oschwald. Lumen Thrust Chamber
- Injector performance and Stability. In 7th Edition of the Space Propulsion Conference, Virtual, 2021.
[14] E. Kurudzija, K. Dresia, J. Martin, T. Traudt, J. C. Deeken, and G. Waxenegger-Wilfing. Virtual Sensing for
Fault Detection within the LUMEN Fuel Turbopump Test Campaign. In 9th Edition of the Space Propulsion
Conference, Glasgow, Scotland, 2024.
[15] R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, K. Dresia. LUMEN Generic Turbopump Models. Technical report, DLR-LA-LM-TP-
TB-005-01, Lampoldshausen, Germany, 2024.
[16] D. Suslov, J. Haemisch, E. Zametaev, W. Armbruster, M. Börner, R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, S. Klein, K. Dresia,
J. Hardi, T. Traudt, J. C. Deeken, and S. Schlechtriem. Development of a 25 kN Regeneratively Cooled LOX/LNG
Thrust Chamber for LUMEN. In 9th Edition of the Space Propulsion Conference, Glasgow, Scotland, 2024.
[17] D. Suslov, J. Haubrich, J. Haemisch, K. J. Artzt, J. Munk, W. Armbruster, J. S. Hardi, and J. C. Deeken. Develop-
ment and Qualification Testing of a Laser Poweder Bed Fusion Manufactured 25 kN LOX/LNG Regeneratively
Cooled Thrust Chamber Produced from CuCrZr-Alloy. In 9th Edition of the Space Propulsion Conference, Glas-
gow, Scotland, 2024.
[18] T. Traudt, W. Armbruster, C.r Groll, R. H. Dos Santos Hahn, K. Dresia, M. Börner, S. Klein, D. Suslov, E. Ku-
rudzija, J. Haemisch, M. A. Müller, J. C. Deeken, J. Hardi, and S. Schlechtriem. LUMEN, the Test Bed for
Rocket Engine Components: Results of the Acceptance Tests and Overview on the Engine Test Preparation. In
9th Edition of the Space Propulsion Conference, Glasgow, Scotland, 2024.
12
DOI: 10.13009/EUCASS2025-105